whatever leadership emerges after December s elective conference vote. Perhaps the only thing that could change the political outcome is a split within the ANC itself. part of the adhesive political assassinations occurred in KwaZulu-Natal between 1994 and 2014; other studies give other estimates . Very few of the perpetrators of these political killings, often between rivals within the ANC, are apprehended, much less brought to court. other estimates State of Capture report, the Betrayal of the Promise report compiled by the Betrayal of the Promise Unburdening Panel Process , the massive email leaks and the OUTA particulars of claim are OUTA particulars of claim rights (more recently referred to as blue rights) contained in most liberal constitutions, guaranteeing freedom of expression, due process and political participation and protecting citizens against excesses of the state. It also incorporates second generation rights (also referred to as red rights ), legal rights that emerged after the Second World War and deal with economic, social and cultural rights. These impose an obligation on the state to provide certain things within its means such as basic housing and education, to secure labour rights, and ensure that citizens do not go hungry or remain untreated if they are sick. It also includes third generation rights (or green rights) and includes issues such as self-determination, the right to development, rights to natural resources and rights to satisfactory environment. Of late, there has been sharp analysis sharp analysis what has gone wrong Richard Poplak points out , one of its fundamental weaknesses is that it invests too much power in the executive and especially in an indirectly elected executive president. The other weakness is the failure of the different spheres of government, national, provincial and local, to function effectively on a co-operative basis. This problem was explored in a paper entitled Promises Unmet Multi-level Government in South Africa by legal academics Christina Murray and Richard Simeon Promises Unmet Multi-level Government in South Africa peace settlement rather than of a careful analysis of the costs and benefits of decentralisation, including bringing government closer to the people and the virtues of competition that federalism can bring. It is in our cities where the genesis of picking up the pieces could start. Already, 40% of all South Africans live in the cities produce nearly 60% of the country s economic output (measured as gross value-add). More South Africans are moving to urban areas. The National Development Plan estimates that by 2030, South Africa will have a 70% rate of urbanisation, with most growth in the largest metros. However, the budgets that city governments control is Although not following the rather arbitrary scheme set up by the Constitution, pushing key national and provincial functions down to city level is technically possible. Our current DM DM Dirk runs a corporate finance and advisory firm, QED Solutions (qedsolutions.co.za ) out of Cape Town. qedsolutions.co.za