In 2012, Cosatu, the SACP and the ANC all had their big conferences . And all ended as they had begun, with the same top leaders in charge . It was the actions of everyone involved then (particularly in Cosatu) in just trying to clamp down on the inner tensions of the groups involved that eventually led to the situation we have now, w here we can end 2019 with wholesale changes in all of these groups, and massive changes to our politics as a result . In 2012, Cosatu, the SACP and the ANC all had their big conferences . And all ended as they had begun, with the same top leaders in charge . It was the actions of everyone involved then (particularly in Cosatu) in just trying to clamp down on the inner tensions of the groups involved that eventually led to the situation we have now, w here we can end 2019 with wholesale changes in all of these groups, and massive changes to our politics as a result . In In In 2012, 2012, 2012, Cosatu, Cosatu, Cosatu, the the the SACP SACP SACP and and and the the the ANC ANC ANC all all all had had had their big conferences conferences conferences . And And And all all all ended ended ended as as as they they they had had had begun, begun, begun, with with with the the the same same same top top top leaders leaders leaders in in in charge charge charge . It It It was was was the the the actions actions actions of of of everyone everyone everyone involved involved involved then then then (particularly (particularly (particularly in in in Cosatu) Cosatu) Cosatu) in in in just just just trying trying trying to to to clamp clamp clamp down down down on on on the the the inner inner inner tensions tensions tensions of of of the the the groups groups groups involved involved involved that that that eventually led led led to to to the the the situation situation situation we we we have have have now, now, now, w here here here here we we we we can can can can end end end end 2019 2019 2019 2019 with with with with wholesale wholesale wholesale wholesale changes changes changes changes in in in in all all all all of of of of these these these these groups, groups, groups, groups, and and and and massive massive massive massive changes changes changes changes to to to to our our our our politics politics politics politics as as as as a a a a result result result result . . In In In In In some some some some some ways, ways, ways, ways, ways, the the the the the changes changes changes changes changes are are are are are overstated; overstated; overstated; overstated; overstated; there there there there there are are are are are those those those those those who who who who who believe believe believe believe believe that that that that that if if if if if Cyril Cyril Cyril Cyril Cyril Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa wins, wins, wins, wins, wins, the the the the the ANC ANC ANC ANC ANC will will will will will properly properly properly properly properly transform transform transform transform transform back back back back back into into into into into what what what what what it it it it it was was was was was during during during during during its its its its its glorious glorious glorious glorious glorious moral moral moral moral moral heyday heyday heyday heyday heyday . . . But But But But But that that that that that ignores ignores ignores ignores ignores the the the the the very very very very very real real real real real problems problems problems problems problems Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa would would would would would face face face face face as as as as as leader, leader, leader, leader, leader, and and and and and issues issues issues issues issues around around around around around a a a a a culture culture culture culture culture of of of of of corruption corruption corruption corruption corruption that that that that that Kgalema Kgalema Kgalema Kgalema Kgalema Motlanthe Motlanthe Motlanthe Motlanthe Motlanthe and and and and and many many many many many others others others others others believe believe believe believe believe has has has has has taken taken taken taken taken hold hold hold hold hold of of of of of the the the the the party party party party party . . . But But But But But in in in in in other other other other other ways, ways, ways, ways, ways, they ve they ve they ve they ve they ve actually actually actually actually actually understated understated understated understated understated . I . I . I t t t t t seems seems seems seems seems likely likely likely likely likely that that that that that if if if if if the the the the the party party party party party does does does does does not not not not not just just just just just split, split, split, split, split, other other other other other huge huge huge huge huge changes changes changes changes changes are are are are are in in in in in the the the the the offing offing offing offing offing . . . One is the possibility that the SACP goes it alone . The voices in the party calling for this are growing stronger, and its conference is growing nearer . In fact, it will happen just days after the ANC s Policy Conference . Still, there are plenty of issues the SACP needs to consider before making a proper decision on this . One is the possibility that the SACP goes it alone . The voices in the party calling for this are growing stronger, and its conference is growing nearer . In fact, it will happen just days after the ANC s Policy Conference . Still, there are plenty of issues the SACP needs to consider before making a proper decision on this . One One One is is is the the the possibility possibility possibility that that that the the the SACP SACP SACP goes goes goes it it it alone alone alone . The The The voices voices voices in in in the the the party party party calling calling calling for for for this this this are are are growing growing growing stronger, stronger, stronger, and and and its its its conference conference conference is is is growing growing growing nearer nearer nearer . In In In fact, fact, fact, it it it will will will happen happen happen just just just days days days after after after the the the ANC s ANC s ANC s Policy Policy Policy Conference Conference Conference . Still, Still, Still, there there there are are are plenty plenty plenty of of of issues issues issues the the the SACP SACP SACP needs needs needs to to to consider consider consider before before before making making making a a a proper proper proper decision decision decision on on on this this this . The first is whether it simply has to give up on the ANC . This really boils down to whether it thinks its preferred choice, in Ramaphosa, still has a chance of winning . If there is no chance of him winning if it will definitely be won by Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and, through her, President Jacob Zuma himself then they really have no choice . They have to go . Which means that if the SACP decides not to leave the alliance in July, it could well mean they believe Ramaphosa still has a strong chance . The first is whether it simply has to give up on the ANC . This really boils down to whether it thinks its preferred choice, in Ramaphosa, still has a chance of winning . If there is no chance of him winning if it will definitely be won by Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and, through her, President Jacob Zuma himself then they really have no choice . They have to go . Which means that if the SACP decides not to leave the alliance in July, it could well mean they believe Ramaphosa still has a strong chance . The The The first first first is is is whether whether whether it it it simply simply simply has has has to to to give give give up up up on on on the the the ANC ANC ANC . This This This really really really boils boils boils down down down to to to whether whether whether it it it thinks thinks thinks its its its preferred preferred preferred choice, choice, choice, in in in Ramaphosa, Ramaphosa, Ramaphosa, still still still has has has a a a chance chance chance of of of winning winning winning . If If If there there there is is is no no no chance chance chance of of of him him him winning if winning if winning if it it it will will will definitely definitely definitely be be be won won won by by by Nkosazana Nkosazana Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma Dlamini-Zuma Dlamini-Zuma and, through her, and, through her, and, through her, President President President Jacob Jacob Jacob Zuma Zuma Zuma himself then himself then himself then they they they really really really have have have no no no choice choice choice . They They They have have have to to to go go go . Which Which Which means means means that that that if if if the the the SACP SACP SACP decides decides decides not not not to to to leave the alliance leave the alliance leave the alliance in in in July, July, July, it it it could could could well well well mean mean mean they they they believe believe believe Ramaphosa Ramaphosa Ramaphosa still still still has has has a a a strong strong strong chance chance chance . In the same vein, if we accept for a moment that the actions of the SACP could be a predictor of what might happen, it might also suggest that if it leaves the alliance, then it is more likely that the ANC will itself split, just as its move to support Zuma in 2007 was an indicator that he would win . In the same vein, if we accept for a moment that the actions of the SACP could be a predictor of what might happen, it might also suggest that if it leaves the alliance, then it is more likely that the ANC will itself split, just as its move to support Zuma in 2007 was an indicator that he would win . In In In the the the same same same vein, vein, vein, if if if we we we accept accept accept for for for a a a moment moment moment that that that the the the actions actions actions of of of the the the SACP SACP SACP could could could be be be a a a predictor predictor predictor of of of what what what might might might happen, happen, happen, it it it might might might also also also suggest suggest suggest that that that if if if it it it leaves leaves leaves the the the alliance, alliance, alliance, then then then it it it is is is more more more likely likely likely that that that the the the ANC ANC ANC will will will itself itself itself split, split, split, just just just as as as its its its move move move to to to support support support Zuma Zuma Zuma in in in 2007 2007 2007 was was was an an an indicator indicator indicator that that that he he he would would would win win win . But the re are other factors to consider as well, and Cosatu is one of the most important . The final declaration of Cosatu s Central Committee last week could be over-simplified to say that it was now joining the active campaign against Zuma, and by extension Dlamini-Zuma . Strangely, the SACP is now like Cosatu used to be when Zwelinzi ma Vavi was still there, all pushing for the working class and critical of the Zuma-led ANC . And Cosatu has now caught up to the new SACP, and is actively campaigning against Zuma . But the re are other factors to consider as well, and Cosatu is one of the most important . The final declaration of Cosatu s Central Committee last week could be over-simplified to say that it was now joining the active campaign against Zuma, and by extension Dlamini-Zuma . Strangely, the SACP is now like Cosatu used to be when Zwelinzi ma Vavi was still there, all pushing for the working class and critical of the Zuma-led ANC . And Cosatu has now caught up to the new SACP, and is actively campaigning against Zuma . But But But the the the re re re re are are are are other other other other factors factors factors factors to to to to consider consider consider consider as as as as well, well, well, well, and and Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu is is one one one one of of of of the the the the most most most most important important important important . . The The The The final final final final declaration declaration declaration declaration of of of of Cosatu s Cosatu s Cosatu s Cosatu s Central Central Central Central Committee Committee Committee Committee last last last last week week week week could could could could be be be be over-simplified over-simplified over-simplified over-simplified to to to to say say say say that that that that it it it it was was was was now now now now joining joining joining joining the the the the active active active active campaign campaign campaign campaign against against against against Zuma, Zuma, Zuma, Zuma, and and and and by by by by extension extension extension extension Dlamini-Zuma Dlamini-Zuma Dlamini-Zuma Dlamini-Zuma . . Strangely, Strangely, Strangely, Strangely, the the the the SACP SACP SACP SACP is is is is now now now now like like like like Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu used used used used to to to to be be be be when when when when Zwelinzi Zwelinzi Zwelinzi Zwelinzi ma ma ma Vavi Vavi Vavi was was was still still still there, there, there, all all all pushing pushing pushing for for for the the the working working working class class class and and and critical critical critical of of of the the the Zuma-led Zuma-led Zuma-led ANC ANC ANC . And And And Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu has has has now now now caught caught caught up up up to to to the the the new new new SACP, SACP, SACP, and and and is actively actively actively campaigning campaigning campaigning against against against Zuma Zuma Zuma . In other words, their agendas and interests are now finally aligned . In other words, their agendas and interests are now finally aligned . In In In other other other words, words, words, their their their agendas agendas agendas and and and interests interests interests are are are now now now finally finally finally aligned aligned aligned . But for communists, something more fundamental and difficult might be at stake . Generally speaking, these are people who believe in class struggle, the idea that the working classes have to take on the capitalist elite for control of the commanding heights of the economy . It s about the lumpen proletariat and big capital (but not, strictly not, White Monopoly Capital) and the Marxist t heory of something most people don t ever quite get their heads around . So, for the SACP then, they have to answer the question: which is the best way to actually get their class interests represented, and improved in our society . But for communists, something more fundamental and difficult might be at stake . Generally speaking, these are people who believe in class struggle, the idea that the working classes have to take on the capitalist elite for control of the commanding heights of the economy . It s about the lumpen proletariat and big capital (but not, strictly not, White Monopoly Capital) and the Marxist t heory of something most people don t ever quite get their heads around . So, for the SACP then, they have to answer the question: which is the best way to actually get their class interests represented, and improved in our society . But But But for for for communists, communists, communists, something something something more more more fundamental fundamental fundamental and and and difficult difficult difficult might might might be be be at at at stake stake stake . Generally Generally Generally speaking, speaking, speaking, these these these are are are people people people who who who believe believe believe in in in class class class struggle, struggle, struggle, the the the idea idea idea that that that the the the working working working classes classes classes have have have to to to take take take on on on the the the capitalist capitalist capitalist elite elite elite for for for control control control of of of the the the commanding commanding commanding heights heights heights of of of the the the economy economy economy . It s It s It s about about about the the the lumpen lumpen lumpen proletariat proletariat proletariat and and and big big big capital capital capital (but (but (but not, not, not, strictly strictly strictly not, not, not, White White White Monopoly Monopoly Monopoly Capital) Capital) Capital) and and and the the the Marxist Marxist Marxist t heory heory heory of of of something something something most most most people people people don t don t don t ever ever ever quite quite quite get get get their their their heads heads heads around around around . So, So, So, for for for the the the SACP SACP SACP then, then, then, they they they have have have to to to answer answer answer the the the question: question: question: which which which is is is the the the best best best way way way to to to actually actually actually get get get their their their class class class interests interests interests represented, represented, represented, and and and improved improved improved in in in our our our society society society . Up Up Up Up Up until until until until until now, now, now, now, now, the the the the the answer answer answer answer answer to to to to to that that that that that question question question question question has has has has has been been been been been through through through through through the the the the the ANC ANC ANC ANC ANC . . . It It It It It was was was was was the the the the the quicker, quicker, quicker, quicker, quicker, easier easier easier easier easier route route route route route to to to to to state state state state state power power power power power . . . And And And And And if if if if if you you you you you ever ever ever ever ever have have have have have an an an an an awful awful awful awful awful lot lot lot lot lot of of of of of time time time time time on on on on on your your your your your hands, hands, hands, hands, hands, you you you you you could could could could could delve delve delve delve delve into into into into into the the the the the online online online online online discussions discussions discussions discussions discussions around around around around around whether whether whether whether whether Nelson Nelson Nelson Nelson Nelson Mandela Mandela Mandela Mandela Mandela was was was was was a a a a a communist communist communist communist communist and and and and and a a a a a member member member member member of of of of of the the the the the SACP SACP SACP SACP SACP and and and and and how how how how how much much much much much power power power power power the the the the the SACP SACP SACP SACP SACP may may may may may have have have have have had had had had had over over over over over the the the the the ANC ANC ANC ANC ANC over over over over over the the the the the years years years years years . . . But But But But But now now now now now their their their their their way way way way way to to to to to exercise exercise exercise exercise exercise that that that that that power power power power power is is is is is blocked blocked blocked blocked blocked . . . By By By By By Zuma, Zuma, Zuma, Zuma, Zuma, and and and and and other other other other other dynamics, dynamics, dynamics, dynamics, dynamics, w w w hich hich hich hich hich means means means means means it it it it it may may may may may be be be be be time time time time time to to to to to change change change change change tack tack tack tack tack . . . One of the ways, and certainly the most logical at this point, would be to contest for power on its own, and to use the seats it wins in Parliament as a way that represents its class interests . So, if the ANC (presuming it won the 2019 elections .... ) proposed that big companies be nationalised, then the SACP would back it . If the party instead brought a bill to privatise SAA, then it could oppose it . One of the ways, and certainly the most logical at this point, would be to contest for power on its own, and to use the seats it wins in Parliament as a way that represents its class interests . So, if the ANC (presuming it won the 2019 elections .... ) proposed that big companies be nationalised, then the SACP would back it . If the party instead brought a bill to privatise SAA, then it could oppose it . One One One of of of the the the ways, ways, ways, and and and certainly certainly certainly the the the most most most logical logical logical at at at this this this point, point, point, would would would be be be to to to contest contest contest for for for power power power on on on its its its own, own, own, and and and to to to use use use the the the seats seats seats it it it wins wins wins in in in Parliament Parliament Parliament as as as a a a way way way that that that represents represents represents its its its class class class interests interests interests . So, So, So, if if if the the the ANC ANC ANC (presuming (presuming (presuming it it it won won won the the the 2019 2019 2019 elections elections elections .... ) ) ) proposed proposed proposed that that that big big big companies companies companies be be be nationalised, nationalised, nationalised, then then then the the the SACP SACP SACP would would would back back back it it it . If If If the the the party party party instead instead instead brought brought brought a a a bill bill bill to to to privatise privatise privatise SAA, SAA, SAA, then then then it it it could could could oppose oppose oppose it it it . This would have an effect on our politics that would be, to use one of the SACP s favourite words, revolutionary . Imagine, we would have politics in P arliament based on actual ideas . Depending on how things panned out, you may end up with a political party that is in power, but is not able to pass everything it wants to . Imagine the ANC needing SACP votes to pass some bills, and DA votes to pass others . This would have an effect on our politics that would be, to use one of the SACP s favourite words, revolutionary . Imagine, we would have politics in P arliament based on actual ideas . Depending on how things panned out, you may end up with a political party that is in power, but is not able to pass everything it wants to . Imagine the ANC needing SACP votes to pass some bills, and DA votes to pass others . This This This would would would have have have an an an effect effect effect on on on our our our politics politics politics that that that would would would be, be, be, to to to use use use one one one of of of the the the SACP s SACP s SACP s favourite favourite favourite words, words, words, revolutionary revolutionary revolutionary . Imagine, Imagine, Imagine, we we we would would would have have have politics politics politics in in in P arliament arliament arliament based based based on on on actual actual actual ideas ideas ideas . Depending Depending Depending on on on how how how things things things panned panned panned out, out, out, you you you may may may end end end up up up with with with a a a political political political party party party that that that is is is in in in power, power, power, but but but is is is not not not able able able to to to pass pass pass everything everything everything it it it wants wants wants to to to . Imagine Imagine Imagine the the the ANC ANC ANC needing needing needing SACP SACP SACP votes votes votes to to to pass pass pass some some some bills, bills, bills, and and and DA DA DA votes votes votes to to to pass pass pass others others others . At the same time, presumably, Cosatu would be behind the SACP, which would give it a huge organisational force . To make things even more interesting, it is possible that the new SA Federation of Trade Unions, Zwelinzima Vavi s SAFTU, could join as well . It would surely be in their interests to . And while it may be crossing the line from political science-fiction to fantasy, this could be the way Cosatu and SAFTU (and Vavi and NUMSA) come back from their de-merger . At the same time, presumably, Cosatu would be behind the SACP, which would give it a huge organisational force . To make things even more interesting, it is possible that the new SA Federation of Trade Unions, Zwelinzima Vavi s SAFTU, could join as well . It would surely be in their interests to . And while it may be crossing the line from political science-fiction to fantasy, this could be the way Cosatu and SAFTU (and Vavi and NUMSA) come back from their de-merger . At At At the the the same same same time, time, time, presumably, presumably, presumably, Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu would would would be be be behind behind behind the the the SACP, SACP, SACP, which which which would would would give give give it it it a a a huge huge huge organisational organisational organisational force force force . To To To make make make things things things even even even more more more interesting, interesting, interesting, it it it is is is possible possible possible that that that the the the new new new SA SA SA Federation Federation Federation of of of Trade Trade Trade Unions, Unions, Unions, Zwelinzima Zwelinzima Zwelinzima Vavi s Vavi s Vavi s SAFTU, SAFTU, SAFTU, could could could join join join as as as well well well . It It It would would would surely surely surely be be be in in in their their their interests interests interests to to to . And And And while while while it it it may may may be be be crossing crossing crossing the the the line line line from from from political political political science-fiction science-fiction science-fiction to to to fantasy, fantasy, fantasy, this this this could could could be be be the the the way way way Cosatu Cosatu Cosatu and and and SAFTU SAFTU SAFTU (and (and (and Vavi Vavi Vavi and and and NUMSA) NUMSA) NUMSA) come come come back back back from from from their their their de-merger de-merger de-merger . The final result of all of this could be something based in the very nature of our system . In many countries that use proportional representation, it is common to see many different smaller parties contesting for power, rather than two or three bigger ones, as we have at the moment . For examples, much of Europe will work as a textbook, think Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium . The introduction of an independent SACP could well lead to this happening in South Africa as well . The final result of all of this could be something based in the very nature of our system . In many countries that use proportional representation, it is common to see many different smaller parties contesting for power, rather than two or three bigger ones, as we have at the moment . For examples, much of Europe will work as a textbook, think Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium . The introduction of an independent SACP could well lead to this happening in South Africa as well . The The The final final final result result result of of of all all all of of of this this this could could could be be be something something something based based based in in in the the the very very very nature nature nature of of of our our our system system system . In In In many many many countries countries countries that that that use use use proportional proportional proportional representation, representation, representation, it it it is is is common common common to to to see see see many many many different different different smaller smaller smaller parties parties parties contesting contesting contesting for for for power, power, power, rather rather rather than than than two two two or or or three three three bigger bigger bigger ones, ones, ones, as as as we we we have have have at at at the the the moment moment moment . For For For examples, examples, examples, much much much of of of Europe Europe Europe will will will work work work as as as a a a textbook, textbook, textbook, think think think Denmark, Denmark, Denmark, the the the Netherlands Netherlands Netherlands and and and Belgium Belgium Belgium . The The The introduction introduction introduction of of of an an an independent independent independent SACP SACP SACP could could could well well well lead lead lead to to to this this this happening happening happening in South Africa South Africa South Africa as as as well well well . That could have positive and negative consequences . Coalitions would be necessary, which might remove some of the bitterness and public emotion from our politics . There s no point insulting someone you may have to work with later . And it is tough to commit corruption in a coalition, because the person who would benefit from blowing the whistle is in the same government as you and can see what you re up to . But it can also lead to more instability with no one party being able to maintain a coalition for long enough to give the country a policy direction . Italy is a good example . That could have positive and negative consequences . Coalitions would be necessary, which might remove some of the bitterness and public emotion from our politics . There s no point insulting someone you may have to work with later . And it is tough to commit corruption in a coalition, because the person who would benefit from blowing the whistle is in the same government as you and can see what you re up to . But it can also lead to more instability with no one party being able to maintain a coalition for long enough to give the country a policy direction . Italy is a good example . That That That could could could have have have positive positive positive and and and negative negative negative consequences consequences consequences . Coalitions Coalitions Coalitions would would would be be be necessary, necessary, necessary, which which which might might might remove remove remove some some some of of of the the the bitterness bitterness bitterness and and and public public public emotion emotion emotion from from from our our our politics politics politics . There s There s There s no no no point point point insulting insulting insulting someone someone someone you you you may may may have have have to to to work work work with with with later later later . And And And it it it is is is tough tough tough to to to commit commit commit corruption corruption corruption in in in a a a coalition, coalition, coalition, because because because the the the person person person who who who would would would benefit benefit benefit from from from blowing blowing blowing the the the whistle whistle whistle is is is in in in the the the same same same government government government as as as you you you and and and can can can see see see what what what you re you re you re up up up to to to . But But But it it it can can can also also also lead lead lead to to to more more more instability instability instability with with with no no no one one one party party party being being being able able able to to to maintain maintain maintain a a a coalition coalition coalition for for for long long long enough enough enough to to to give give give the the the country country country a policy policy policy direction direction direction . Italy Italy Italy is is is a a a good good good example example example . While there are certainties in our politics at the moment, it does seem safe to say this 2017 will not be 2012 . It could in fact be the opposite . This time things may change completely and utterly . DM While there are certainties in our politics at the moment, it does seem safe to say this 2017 will not be 2012 . It could in fact be the opposite . This time things may change completely and utterly . DM While While While there there there are are are certainties certainties certainties in in in our our our politics politics politics at at at the the the moment, moment, moment, it it it does does does seem seem seem safe safe safe to to to say say say this 2017 this 2017 this 2017 will will will not not not be be be 2012 2012 2012 . It It It could could could in in in fact fact fact be be be the the the opposite opposite opposite . This time things may This time things may This time things may change change change completely completely completely and and and utterly utterly utterly . DM DM Photo: Minister of Higher Education and Training, Dr. Blade Nzimande, briefing the media on Post School Education and Training Opportunities and all the plans for 2016 academic year at GCIS, Tshedimosetso House in Pretoria.11/01/2016. Photo: Minister of Higher Education and Training, Dr. Blade Nzimande, briefing the media on Post School Education and Training Opportunities and all the plans for 2016 academic year at GCIS, Tshedimosetso House in Pretoria.11/01/2016.