1. Amuse Bouche April 29, 2013. It s difficult to recall, given how the insta-news cycle fiddles with the gentle arc of time, but when a chartered Jet Airways A330-200 touched down at AFB Waterkloof a chartered Jet Airways A330-200 touched down at AFB Waterkloof transforming a military airbase into a red carpet Nothing was sacred in the land of the profaned not even the National Party-era security designations that successive ANC governments hadn t bothered to update. And so, it s almost too perfect that South African taxpayers picked up the tab for the Gupta nuptials. Every line item, no matter how seemingly arbitrary, was paid for by you. The Guptas, their lieutenants, and their hirelings spared no expense, but also made sure that they (we?) received discounts on bulk purchases for items such as champagne and vodka your money was wasted, but so were the guests! and they also delayed payment as much as possible delayed payment as much as possible Frozen and the headtrip that results from dropping 60mg of ketamine while riding through Jaipur on a tiger. Thanks to the labours of amaBhungane s forensics team, we have now ascertained the following: the money for the wedding came from the Free State s Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. The responsibility of stealing hundreds of millions of rands fell to a company called Estina (Pty) Ltd Estina (Pty) Ltd In a normal country, the R114 million a year the province promised to throw at Estina would have amounted to standard-issue pork barrel politics an overpriced project benefitting the locals in order to buy their loyalty come election time. But sadly, the locals don t benefit in this story. Estina was linked to the Guptas via its director , Kamal Vasram, who was so unqualified that he would likely have trouble distinguishing a milk cow from a phablet. During a torrid month-and-a-half in 2013, and under Vasram s trigger-happy control, Estina transferred exactly 8,348,700 USD (or R84 million at the time or R84 million at the time Aren t big brand global independent financial enablers auditors just the best? Anyway, in return for this tale of fiduciary woe, I ask that you permit me the indulgence of a little coda. I recently reported a story for an international publication, and the assignment required that I travelled to a Free State township called Rammulotsi. As ever, I found a dirt-and crime-riddled shithole that stood alongside the pristine, largely white town of Viljoenskroen the two municipalities functioned as a perfectly rendered diorama of the apartheid era. Part of the brief was to cover a UK-based charity called Dramatic Need, which was based in Rammulotsi, and had since 2007 helped the local kids express themselves through artistic practice. At first, I rolled my eyes, made farting noises, and presented all the usual objections: who are these British knobs to come here to meddle with South Africa s kids? As we now know, the quarterback for the wedding caper was no one less than Mosebenzi Zwane, Free State born and bred, and a great promoter of radical economic transformation in its various permutations. It seems unlikely that any of the provisions he has so far recommended a judicial inquiry into the behaviour of the banking sector a judicial inquiry into the behaviour of the banking sector doubling down on elite-making BEE initiatives in the mining sector am suggesting that it takes a special kind of asshole to willfully ignore the misery that exists in his or her own constituency, and help pump taxpayers cash into foreign bank accounts in order to fund a circus, when bread is so desperately required. Every wedding invites a hangover. The Guptas has not yet kicked in, but it s about to. And it s going to be a killer. DM DM Richard Poplak was born and lives in Johannesburg, South Africa. He trained as a filmmaker and fine artist at Montreal s Concordia University and has produced and directed numerous short films, music videos and commercials. Now a full-time writer, Richard is a senior contributor at South Africa s leading news site, Daily Maverick, and a frequent contributor to publications all over the world. He is a member of Deca Stories, the international long-form non-fiction collective.