It appears that the concept of accountability from this perspective is not dealt with in the Constitution. It appears that the concept of accountability from this perspective is not dealt with in the Constitution. It appears that the concept of accountability from this perspective is not dealt with in the Constitution. It appears that the concept of accountability from this perspective is not dealt with in the Constitution. Democracy cannot simply mean voting every five years Democracy cannot simply mean voting every five years Democracy cannot simply mean voting every five years Ac countability to the electorate is a crucial ingredient that contributes to meaningful participation in the democratic system. It also breathes legitimacy into the mandate the government receives every five years. If the government is not made accountable by way of the Constitution, then democracy is not distinguishable from a dictatorship or an oligarch of elite politicians. Ac countability to the electorate is a crucial ingredient that contributes to meaningful participation in the democratic system. It also breathes legitimacy into the mandate the government receives every five years. If the government is not made accountable by way of the Constitution, then democracy is not distinguishable from a dictatorship or an oligarch of elite politicians. Ac countability to the electorate is a crucial ingredient that contributes to meaningful participation in the democratic system. It also breathes legitimacy into the mandate the government receives every five years. If the government is not made accountable by way of the Constitution, then democracy is not distinguishable from a dictatorship or an oligarch of elite politicians. Ac countability countability to the electorate is a crucial ingredient that contributes to meaningful participation in the democratic system. It also breathes legitimacy into the mandate the government receives every five years. If the government is not made accountable by way of the Constitution, then democracy is not distinguishable from a dictatorship or an oligarch of elite politicians. It is the writer s submission that specific a ccountability provisions must be built into the Constitution whereby politicians and senior officials can be forced to resign or can be suspended immediately in the event of questionable conduct of a serious nature. The people of South Africa are entitled to visible and executable accountability. It is the writer s submission that specific a ccountability provisions must be built into the Constitution whereby politicians and senior officials can be forced to resign or can be suspended immediately in the event of questionable conduct of a serious nature. The people of South Africa are entitled to visible and executable accountability. It is the writer s submission that specific a ccountability provisions must be built into the Constitution whereby politicians and senior officials can be forced to resign or can be suspended immediately in the event of questionable conduct of a serious nature. The people of South Africa are entitled to visible and executable accountability. It is the writer s submission that specific a It is the writer s submission that specific a ccountability provisions must be built into the Constitution whereby politicians and senior officials can be forced to resign or can be suspended immediately in the event of questionable conduct of a serious nature. The people of South Africa are entitled to visible and executable accountability. A cursory reading of the Constitution reveals that the Constitution is flawed in that the accountability of the President and Cabinet is dealt with in a superficial manner as will appear from the following sections of the Constitution: A cursory reading of the Constitution reveals that the Constitution is flawed in that the accountability of the President and Cabinet is dealt with in a superficial manner as will appear from the following sections of the Constitution: A cursory reading of the Constitution reveals that the Constitution is flawed in that the accountability of the President and Cabinet is dealt with in a superficial manner as will appear from the following sections of the Constitution: The National Assembly, by a resolution adopted with a supporting vote of at least two thirds of its members, may remove the President from office only on the grounds of: The National Assembly, by a resolution adopted with a supporting vote of at least two thirds of its members, may remove the President from office only on the grounds of: The National Assembly, by a resolution adopted with a supporting vote of at least two thirds of its members, may remove the President from office only on the grounds of: It is not clear what the exact grounds for removal are under par b. No mention is made in section 89 of the suspension from office of the incumbent President in certain circumstances. It is not clear what the exact grounds for removal are under par b. No mention is made in section 89 of the suspension from office of the incumbent President in certain circumstances. It is not clear what the exact grounds for removal are under par b. No mention is made in section 89 of the suspension from office of the incumbent President in certain circumstances. It is not clear what the exact grounds for removal are under par b. No mention is made in section 89 of the suspension suspension from office of the incumbent President in certain circumstances. 96. Conduct of Cabinet members and Deputy Ministers 96. Conduct of Cabinet members and Deputy Ministers 96. Conduct of Cabinet members and Deputy Ministers Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers must act in accordance with a code of ethics prescribed by national legislation. Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers must act in accordance with a code of ethics prescribed by national legislation. Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers must act in accordance with a code of ethics prescribed by national legislation. Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers may not- Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers may not- Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers may not- The elephant in the room is the fact that there no specific provision in the Constitution whereby a President, Minister or Member of Parliament against whom a prima facie case of serious misconduct has been made, can be suspended from office pending a final decision by court or an administrative body. The elephant in the room is the fact that there no specific provision in the Constitution whereby a President, Minister or Member of Parliament against whom a prima facie case of serious misconduct has been made, can be suspended from office pending a final decision by court or an administrative body. The elephant in the room is the fact that there no specific provision in the Constitution whereby a President, Minister or Member of Parliament against whom a prima facie case of serious misconduct has been made, can be suspended from office pending a final decision by court or an administrative body. The elephant in the room is the fact that there no specific provision in the Constitution whereby a President, Minister or Member of Parliament against whom a prima facie case of serious misconduct has been made, can be suspended suspended from office pending a final decision by court or an administrative body. Bear in mind that the Constitution is a limitation of the government s power and that it should protect the citizens against the government. The government of the day exists to serve its citizens not vice versa. T he Constitution must give more protection to the citizens of the country against elected Members of Parliament, who, once elected, currently have no obligation, other than within political party structure, to be accountable to the people that elected them. Bear in mind that the Constitution is a limitation of the government s power and that it should protect the citizens against the government. The government of the day exists to serve its citizens not vice versa. T he Constitution must give more protection to the citizens of the country against elected Members of Parliament, who, once elected, currently have no obligation, other than within political party structure, to be accountable to the people that elected them. Bear in mind that the Constitution is a limitation of the government s power and that it should protect the citizens against the government. The government of the day exists to serve its citizens not vice versa. T he Constitution must give more protection to the citizens of the country against elected Members of Parliament, who, once elected, currently have no obligation, other than within political party structure, to be accountable to the people that elected them. Bear in mind that the Constitution he government of the day exists to serve its citizens not vice versa. T must give more protection to the citizens of the country against elected Members of Parliament, who, once elected, currently have no obligation, other than within political party structure, to be accountable to the people that elected them. It is suggested that par.19 of Chapter 2 of the Bill of Rights of the Constitution which refers to political rights be amended by adding subparagraph (4): It is suggested that par.19 of Chapter 2 of the Bill of Rights of the Constitution which refers to political rights be amended by adding subparagraph (4): It is suggested that par.19 of Chapter 2 of the Bill of Rights of the Constitution which refers to political rights be amended by adding subparagraph (4): Par.19 reads as follows: Par.19 reads as follows: Par.19 reads as follows: Political rights: Political rights: Political rights: (1) Every citizen is free to make political choices, which includes the right (1) Every citizen is free to make political choices, which includes the right (1) Every citizen is free to make political choices, which includes the right (a) to form a political party; (a) to form a political party; (a) to form a political party; (b) to participate in the activities of, or recruit members for, a political party; (b) to participate in the activities of, or recruit members for, a political party; (b) to participate in the activities of, or recruit members for, a political party; and (c) to campaign for a political party or cause. and (c) to campaign for a political party or cause. and (c) to campaign for a political party or cause. (2) Every citizen has the right to free, fair and regular elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution. (2) Every citizen has the right to free, fair and regular elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution. (2) Every citizen has the right to free, fair and regular elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution. (3) Every adult citizen has the right (3) Every adult citizen has the right (3) Every adult citizen has the right (a) to vote in elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution, and to do so in secret; (a) to vote in elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution, and to do so in secret; (a) to vote in elections for any legislative body established in terms of the Constitution, and to do so in secret; and (b) to stand for public office and, if elected, to hold office. and (b) to stand for public office and, if elected, to hold office. and (b) to stand for public office and, if elected, to hold office. This right to become enforceable and meaningful, must then be enshrined in an Accountability Act by which the absolute power of politicians is curtailed. The act should be based on the following guidelines: This right to become enforceable and meaningful, must then be enshrined in an Accountability Act by which the absolute power of politicians is curtailed. The act should be based on the following guidelines: This right to become enforceable and meaningful, must then be enshrined in an Accountability Act by which the absolute power of politicians is curtailed. The act should be based on the following guidelines: This right to become enforceable and meaningful, must then be enshrined in an Accountability Act by which the absolute power of politicians is curtailed. The act should be based on the following guidelines: Andries Havenga is attorney and associate at Du Plessis & Hofmeyr Inc. Andries Havenga is attorney and associate at Du Plessis & Hofmeyr Inc. Andries Havenga is attorney and associate at Du Plessis & Hofmeyr Inc. Andries Havenga is attorney and associate at Du Plessis & Hofmeyr Inc. Andries Havenga is attorney and associate at Du Plessis & Hofmeyr Inc.