Any ANC delegates still looking for a place to lay their heads after a heavy day of conferencing may find that there s no room at the inn. Several hotels and bed and breakfasts close to Nasrec contacted by Daily Maverick on Thursday indicated they were fully booked, while others were awaiting last-minute confirmation of pre-bookings that had been made. Any ANC delegates still looking for a place to lay their heads after a heavy day of conferencing may find that there s no room at the inn. Several hotels and bed and breakfasts close to Nasrec contacted by Daily Maverick on Thursday indicated they were fully booked, while others were awaiting last-minute confirmation of pre-bookings that had been made. Any ANC delegates still looking for a place to lay their heads after a heavy day of conferencing may find that there s no room at the inn. Several hotels and bed and breakfasts close to Nasrec contacted by Any ANC delegates still looking for a place to lay their heads after a heavy day of conferencing may find that there s no room at the inn. Several hotels and bed and breakfasts close to Nasrec contacted by Daily Maverick Daily Maverick on Thursday indicated they were fully booked, while others were awaiting last-minute confirmation of pre-bookings that had been made. on Thursday indicated they were fully booked, while others were awaiting last-minute confirmation of pre-bookings that had been made. on Thursday indicated they were fully booked, while others were awaiting last-minute confirmation of pre-bookings that had been made. It s to be expected, as over 4,000 delegates from the most senior party member (President Jacob Zuma) to ordinary branch members are expected to attend the ANC s policy conference. It s to be expected, as over 4,000 delegates from the most senior party member (President Jacob Zuma) to ordinary branch members are expected to attend the ANC s policy conference. It s to be expected, as over 4,000 delegates from the most senior party member (President Jacob Zuma) to ordinary branch members are expected to attend the ANC s policy conference. Locals can expect some traffic disruption, particularly in the vicinity of Nasrec and the FNB Stadium, especially when senior delegates and government ministers are arriving at or leaving the venue. Think blue-light brigades. Locals can expect some traffic disruption, particularly in the vicinity of Nasrec and the FNB Stadium, especially when senior delegates and government ministers are arriving at or leaving the venue. Think blue-light brigades. Locals can expect some traffic disruption, particularly in the vicinity of Nasrec and the FNB Stadium, especially when senior delegates and government ministers are arriving at or leaving the venue. Think blue-light brigades. Security will be at a premium several different units from the South African Police Service and traffic officers from the Johannesburg Metro Police department have been deployed. Security will be at a premium several different units from the South African Police Service and traffic officers from the Johannesburg Metro Police department have been deployed. Security will be at a premium several different units from the South African Police Service and traffic officers from the Johannesburg Metro Police department have been deployed. The place has been thoroughly evaluated to make sure that everything is in place for the conference and the JMPD have been deployed around the Nasrec area, said JMPD spokeswoman, Edna Mamonyane, adding that w The place has been thoroughly evaluated to make sure that everything is in place for the conference and the JMPD have been deployed around the Nasrec area, said JMPD spokeswoman, Edna Mamonyane, adding that w The place has been thoroughly evaluated to make sure that everything is in place for the conference and the JMPD have been deployed around the Nasrec area, said JMPD spokeswoman, Edna Mamonyane, adding that w The place has been thoroughly evaluated to make sure that everything is in place for the conference and the JMPD have been deployed around the Nasrec area, said JMPD spokeswoman, Edna Mamonyane, adding that w The place has been thoroughly evaluated to make sure that everything is in place for the conference and the JMPD have been deployed around the Nasrec area, said JMPD spokeswoman, Edna Mamonyane, adding that w ith 2010 World Cup experience, we are familiar with the place. I can give an assurance that it will be tightly guarded . ith 2010 World Cup experience, we are familiar with the place. I can give an assurance that it will be tightly guarded . ith 2010 World Cup experience, we are familiar with the place. I can give an assurance that it will be tightly guarded . People must be aware that traffic will be highly affected, so they should use other routes to avoid being delayed , Mamonyane said. People must be aware that traffic will be highly affected, so they should use other routes to avoid being delayed , Mamonyane said. People must be aware that traffic will be highly affected, so they should use other routes to avoid being delayed , Mamonyane said. The police, ever coy to give details of their security operations, simply said: Everything is in place. The police, ever coy to give details of their security operations, simply said: Everything is in place. The police, ever coy to give details of their security operations, simply said: Everything is in place. If analysts insider view is to be believed, the conference is not so much about policy as the undertones of the leadership race as the party heads to its elective conference in December. If analysts insider view is to be believed, the conference is not so much about policy as the undertones of the leadership race as the party heads to its elective conference in December. If analysts insider view is to be believed, the conference is not so much about policy as the undertones of the leadership race as the party heads to its elective conference in December. Perhaps popular local watering holes believe that these discussions will take up all the delegates time, leaving them no time to visit their establishments. As a result delegates should not expect any special entertainment when they head to some of the popular venues on Soweto s Vilakazi Street . DM Perhaps popular local watering holes believe that these discussions will take up all the delegates time, leaving them no time to visit their establishments. As a result delegates should not expect any special entertainment when they head to some of the popular venues on Soweto s Vilakazi Street . DM Perhaps popular local watering holes believe that these discussions will take up all the delegates time, leaving them no time to visit their establishments. As a result delegates should not expect any special entertainment when they head to some of the popular venues on Soweto s Vilakazi Street Perhaps popular local watering holes believe that these discussions will take up all the delegates time, leaving them no time to visit their establishments. As a result delegates should not expect any special entertainment when they head to some of the popular venues on Soweto s Vilakazi Street Perhaps popular local watering holes believe that these discussions will take up all the delegates time, leaving them no time to visit their establishments. As a result delegates should not expect any special entertainment when they head to some of the popular venues on Soweto s Vilakazi Street . . . DM DM Photo: Delegates sung inside the plenary hall as they waited for the day's events to start. 16 December 2012, ANC 53rd Conference, Mangaung. Photo Greg Nicolson/Daily Maverick Photo: Delegates sung inside the plenary hall as they waited for the day's events to start. 16 December 2012, ANC 53rd Conference, Mangaung. Photo Greg Nicolson/Daily Maverick Photo: Delegates sung inside the plenary hall as they waited for the day's events to start. 16 December 2012, ANC 53rd Conference, Mangaung. Photo Greg Nicolson/Daily Maverick