Releasing a report after a policy conference that still contains some multiple choice discussions to be thrashed out at the national conference in December is, at best, an indicator of an indecisive organisation. Releasing a report after a policy conference that still contains some multiple choice discussions to be thrashed out at the national conference in December is, at best, an indicator of an indecisive organisation. Releasing a report after a policy conference that still contains some multiple choice discussions to be thrashed out at the national conference in December is, at best, an indicator of an indecisive organisation. At worst, it s a sign of an organisation split in two. At worst, it s a sign of an organisation split in two. At worst, it s a sign of an organisation split in two. The general idea for the ANC of holding a policy conference six months before its elective conference in December, was to set aside time to focus on discussing policy positions ready for adoption at the elective conference. The general idea for the ANC of holding a policy conference six months before its elective conference in December, was to set aside time to focus on discussing policy positions ready for adoption at the elective conference. The general idea for the ANC of holding a policy conference six months before its elective conference in December, was to set aside time to focus on discussing policy positions ready for adoption at the elective conference. Last month, however, it was clear that the party had a hard time agreeing on many things, and deferring the actual decisions to the December conference will have the effect of the winning faction also calling the policy shots. Last month, however, it was clear that the party had a hard time agreeing on many things, and deferring the actual decisions to the December conference will have the effect of the winning faction also calling the policy shots. Last month, however, it was clear that the party had a hard time agreeing on many things, and deferring the actual decisions to the December conference will have the effect of the winning faction also calling the policy shots. In the foreword, which is also not usual for a post-policy conference document, Secretary General Gwede Mantashe urges: We must all sober up; it is not a beauty contest. In the foreword, which is also not usual for a post-policy conference document, Secretary General Gwede Mantashe urges: We must all sober up; it is not a beauty contest. In the foreword, which is also not usual for a post-policy conference document, Secretary General Gwede Mantashe urges: We must all sober up; it is not a beauty contest. He writes: The intensity of debates reflected the transitional nature of the gathering, with delegates preparing policies for the next collective leadership, but faltered into shaping them in the image of the current one. He writes: The intensity of debates reflected the transitional nature of the gathering, with delegates preparing policies for the next collective leadership, but faltered into shaping them in the image of the current one. He writes: The intensity of debates reflected the transitional nature of the gathering, with delegates preparing policies for the next collective leadership, but faltered into shaping them in the image of the current one. There is also some insight into the proxy battles that went on in those commissions, where supporters of President Jacob Zuma and his preferred successor, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urged for the recognition of white monopoly capital as a problem, while the opposing camp of Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, said it wasn t all that simple. There is also some insight into the proxy battles that went on in those commissions, where supporters of President Jacob Zuma and his preferred successor, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urged for the recognition of white monopoly capital as a problem, while the opposing camp of Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, said it wasn t all that simple. There is also some insight into the proxy battles that went on in those commissions, where supporters of President Jacob Zuma and his preferred successor, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urged for the recognition of white monopoly capital as a problem, while the opposing camp of Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, said it wasn t all that simple. We all engaged in shoot-outs locked in our positions, not ready to persuade and be persuaded. Is it ideological or positional to fight over the definition of the enemy of the revolution, whether it is monopoly capital or white monopoly capital? Mantashe writes. We all engaged in shoot-outs locked in our positions, not ready to persuade and be persuaded. Is it ideological or positional to fight over the definition of the enemy of the revolution, whether it is monopoly capital or white monopoly capital? Mantashe writes. We all engaged in shoot-outs locked in our positions, not ready to persuade and be persuaded. Is it ideological or positional to fight over the definition of the enemy of the revolution, whether it is monopoly capital or white monopoly capital? Mantashe writes. He said the ideological position wasn t properly considered, but comrades were made to choose between two terms so that one camp would win the debate. He said the ideological position wasn t properly considered, but comrades were made to choose between two terms so that one camp would win the debate. He said the ideological position wasn t properly considered, but comrades were made to choose between two terms so that one camp would win the debate. We are hoping that the branches will be engaged openly and candidly and be part of finding solutions, he urged, adding that the discussions should be anchored in building unity. We are hoping that the branches will be engaged openly and candidly and be part of finding solutions, he urged, adding that the discussions should be anchored in building unity. We are hoping that the branches will be engaged openly and candidly and be part of finding solutions, he urged, adding that the discussions should be anchored in building unity. At the time, there were reports from within the conference of delegates in favour of white monopoly capital , having been well caucused before commissions, speaking off prepared notes. Some delegates claim these were in the minority, but they were the loudest and the best prepared. At the time, there were reports from within the conference of delegates in favour of white monopoly capital , having been well caucused before commissions, speaking off prepared notes. Some delegates claim these were in the minority, but they were the loudest and the best prepared. At the time, there were reports from within the conference of delegates in favour of white monopoly capital , having been well caucused before commissions, speaking off prepared notes. Some delegates claim these were in the minority, but they were the loudest and the best prepared. Anyway, a compromise position was adopted around this term, but looking at the Organisational Renewal chapter in the latest document, there were more issues that the party couldn t agree on. Anyway, a compromise position was adopted around this term, but looking at the Organisational Renewal chapter in the latest document, there were more issues that the party couldn t agree on. Anyway, a compromise position was adopted around this term, but looking at the Organisational Renewal chapter in the latest document, there were more issues that the party couldn t agree on. The most significant suggestions for strengthening the party are as follows: The most significant suggestions for strengthening the party are as follows: The most significant suggestions for strengthening the party are as follows: Election of ANC leaders Election of ANC leaders Election of ANC leaders This is currently distorted through factional practices like slates, vote-buying, patronage, intimidation, and exclusion , which often exclude the best leaders. The current electoral college system is too easily manipulated through branch, regional and provincial secretaries, who determine membership and who gets to attend the elective conferences (just ask Zuma s guys). This is currently distorted through factional practices like slates, vote-buying, patronage, intimidation, and exclusion , which often exclude the best leaders. The current electoral college system is too easily manipulated through branch, regional and provincial secretaries, who determine membership and who gets to attend the elective conferences (just ask Zuma s guys). This is currently distorted through factional practices like slates, vote-buying, patronage, intimidation, and exclusion , which often exclude the best leaders. The current electoral college system is too easily manipulated through branch, regional and provincial secretaries, who determine membership and who gets to attend the elective conferences (just ask Zuma s guys). Therefore: Therefore: Therefore: What the NEC and NWC should look like What the NEC and NWC should look like What the NEC and NWC should look like There are also a number of suggestions about how the veterans should work (a Council of Elders advising the ANC); how the membership system should change (automated with an accessible membership database in the cloud, and avoiding the buying of members); having clear programmes of action and cadre development programmes in branches; campaigning for elections more effectively (in the report it is noted and admitted that there is a tendency to insult voters by gifts of food parcels and blankets before elections as a substitute for effective service delivery ); and a party Policy Institute be set up to help with political education and policy development and implementation. There are also a number of suggestions about how the veterans should work (a Council of Elders advising the ANC); how the membership system should change (automated with an accessible membership database in the cloud, and avoiding the buying of members); having clear programmes of action and cadre development programmes in branches; campaigning for elections more effectively (in the report it is noted and admitted that there is a tendency to insult voters by gifts of food parcels and blankets before elections as a substitute for effective service delivery ); and a party Policy Institute be set up to help with political education and policy development and implementation. There are also a number of suggestions about how the veterans should work (a Council of Elders advising the ANC); how the membership system should change (automated with an accessible membership database in the cloud, and avoiding the buying of members); having clear programmes of action and cadre development programmes in branches; campaigning for elections more effectively (in the report it is noted and admitted that there is a tendency to insult voters by gifts of food parcels and blankets before elections as a substitute for effective service delivery ); and a party Policy Institute be set up to help with political education and policy development and implementation. Other suggestions include fighting corruption in the party and strengthening its integrity, with an admission that current leadership structures seem helpless to arrest these practices, either because they lack the means or the will, or are themselves held hostage by them . DM Other suggestions include fighting corruption in the party and strengthening its integrity, with an admission that current leadership structures seem helpless to arrest these practices, either because they lack the means or the will, or are themselves held hostage by them . DM Other suggestions include fighting corruption in the party and strengthening its integrity, with an admission that current leadership structures seem helpless to arrest these practices, either because they lack the means or the will, or are themselves held hostage by them . Other suggestions include fighting corruption in the party and strengthening its integrity, with an admission that current leadership structures seem helpless to arrest these practices, either because they lack the means or the will, or are themselves held hostage by them . Other suggestions include fighting corruption in the party and strengthening its integrity, with an admission that current leadership structures seem helpless to arrest these practices, either because they lack the means or the will, or are themselves held hostage by them . DM DM Photo: ANC Secretary-General Gwede Mantashe is seen in conversation with President Jacob Zuma at the final session of the ANC s 5 th National Policy Conference which was held at the Nasrec Expo Centre in Johannesburg, July 2018. Photo: IHSAAN HAFFEJEE Photo: ANC Secretary-General Gwede Mantashe is seen in conversation with President Jacob Zuma at the final session of the ANC s 5 th National Policy Conference which was held at the Nasrec Expo Centre in Johannesburg, July 2018. Photo: IHSAAN HAFFEJEE Photo: ANC Secretary-General Gwede Mantashe is seen in conversation with President Jacob Zuma at the final session of the ANC s 5 th National Policy Conference which was held at the Nasrec Expo Centre in Johannesburg, July 2018. Photo: IHSAAN HAFFEJEE Jill of all trades but really, mistress of none, Carien has of late been a political tourist chasing elections and summits in various parts of the world, especially in Africa. After spending her student days at political rallies in South Africa right through the country's first democratic elections in 1994, and after an extended working holiday in London, Carien started working for newspapers full-time in 2003. She's pretty much had her share of reporting on South African politics, attending gatherings and attracting trolls, but still finds herself attracted to it like a moth to a veld fire. Her ultimate ambition in life is to become a travelling chocolate writer of international fame.