On the surface Kenya s is an ordinary democracy, if a little noisy. Election posters of a number of different parties litter walls, street poles and palm trees. Politicians are going on walkabouts and holding rallies, where they re kissing babies or evoking religious metaphors in a different town every day. There s even been an American-style televised presidential debate, except last week the incumbent snubbed it and fourth-time presidential hopeful Raila Odinga debated himself in what was considered by many to be a small PR coup. On the surface Kenya s is an ordinary democracy, if a little noisy. Election posters of a number of different parties litter walls, street poles and palm trees. Politicians are going on walkabouts and holding rallies, where they re kissing babies or evoking religious metaphors in a different town every day. There s even been an American-style televised presidential debate, except last week the incumbent snubbed it and fourth-time presidential hopeful Raila Odinga debated himself in what was considered by many to be a small PR coup. On the surface Kenya s is an ordinary democracy, if a little noisy. Election posters of a number of different parties litter walls, street poles and palm trees. Politicians are going on walkabouts and holding rallies, where they re kissing babies or evoking religious metaphors in a different town every day. There s even been an American-style televised presidential debate, except last week the incumbent snubbed it and fourth-time presidential hopeful Raila Odinga debated himself in what was considered by many to be a small PR coup. But beneath these machinations of a healthy democracy, there is a more sinister undercurrent. It surfaced over the weekend when ICT manager for the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, Chris Msando, was found dead in Muguga Forest, just outside Nairobi. A 21-year-old student, Maryanne Wairimu Ngumbu, was also murdered, apparently because she was out for a drink with him on the Friday night Msando disappeared. But beneath these machinations of a healthy democracy, there is a more sinister undercurrent. It surfaced over the weekend when ICT manager for the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, Chris Msando, was found dead in Muguga Forest, just outside Nairobi. A 21-year-old student, Maryanne Wairimu Ngumbu, was also murdered, apparently because she was out for a drink with him on the Friday night Msando disappeared. But beneath these machinations of a healthy democracy, there is a more sinister undercurrent. It surfaced over the weekend when ICT manager for the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, Chris Msando, was found dead in Muguga Forest, just outside Nairobi. A 21-year-old student, Maryanne Wairimu Ngumbu, was also murdered, apparently because she was out for a drink with him on the Friday night Msando disappeared. It wasn t an ordinary death. Evidence suggests a kidnapping of sorts, and head, neck and back injuries tell a tale of possible torture. It wasn t an ordinary death. Evidence suggests a kidnapping of sorts, and head, neck and back injuries tell a tale of possible torture. It wasn t an ordinary death. Evidence suggests a kidnapping of sorts, and head, neck and back injuries tell a tale of possible torture. It was a warning, and it was calculated to stoke fears in the run-up to the elections where uncertainty is as much part of the campaign staple as propaganda. It was a warning, and it was calculated to stoke fears in the run-up to the elections where uncertainty is as much part of the campaign staple as propaganda. It was a warning, and it was calculated to stoke fears in the run-up to the elections where uncertainty is as much part of the campaign staple as propaganda. Many still remember how, a decade ago, the elections went horribly wrong and Kenya came close to civil war after 1,400 people died violently and 600,000 were displaced in just 59 days. Many still remember how, a decade ago, the elections went horribly wrong and Kenya came close to civil war after 1,400 people died violently and 600,000 were displaced in just 59 days. Many still remember how, a decade ago, the elections went horribly wrong and Kenya came close to civil war after 1,400 people died violently and 600,000 were displaced in just 59 days. Fearing a repeat, those who can have taken to working from home for the next few days, or even leaving the country. Fearing a repeat, those who can have taken to working from home for the next few days, or even leaving the country. Fearing a repeat, those who can have taken to working from home for the next few days, or even leaving the country. Those with fewer means just shrug and say they hope violence won t happen again. Those with fewer means just shrug and say they hope violence won t happen again. Those with fewer means just shrug and say they hope violence won t happen again. At issue was mistrust from both sides around the elections result, which officially saw Mwai Kibaki score a narrow victory over Raila Odinga. The violence, however, took on an ethnic dimension and current president Uhuru Kenyatta and deputy William Ruto were charged by the International Criminal Court with crimes against humanity. At issue was mistrust from both sides around the elections result, which officially saw Mwai Kibaki score a narrow victory over Raila Odinga. The violence, however, took on an ethnic dimension and current president Uhuru Kenyatta and deputy William Ruto were charged by the International Criminal Court with crimes against humanity. At issue was mistrust from both sides around the elections result, which officially saw Mwai Kibaki score a narrow victory over Raila Odinga. The violence, however, took on an ethnic dimension and current president Uhuru Kenyatta and deputy William Ruto were charged by the International Criminal Court with crimes against humanity. The charges have since been dropped because of a lack of evidence. The charges have since been dropped because of a lack of evidence. The charges have since been dropped because of a lack of evidence. Yesterday even the African Union which only comments when the going gets rough issued a statement saying it was shocked about Msando s killing. Yesterday even the African Union which only comments when the going gets rough issued a statement saying it was shocked about Msando s killing. Yesterday even the African Union which only comments when the going gets rough issued a statement saying it was shocked about Msando s killing. AU Commission chair Moussa Faki Mahamat condemned the act and called on Kenyan authorities to conduct a full investigation into the murder and bring those responsible to justice . AU Commission chair Moussa Faki Mahamat condemned the act and called on Kenyan authorities to conduct a full investigation into the murder and bring those responsible to justice . AU Commission chair Moussa Faki Mahamat condemned the act and called on Kenyan authorities to conduct a full investigation into the murder and bring those responsible to justice . He also urged that the government provide those involved in organising the elections with adequate security to guarantee the security and integrity of the electoral process . He called for free, fair and credible elections. He also urged that the government provide those involved in organising the elections with adequate security to guarantee the security and integrity of the electoral process . He called for free, fair and credible elections. He also urged that the government provide those involved in organising the elections with adequate security to guarantee the security and integrity of the electoral process . He called for free, fair and credible elections. He also called on the authorities and the electoral body to ensure that Msando s death does not negatively impact on the elections. He also called on the authorities and the electoral body to ensure that Msando s death does not negatively impact on the elections. He also called on the authorities and the electoral body to ensure that Msando s death does not negatively impact on the elections. Up to this point it s not been such a smooth ride for the IEBC. Up to this point it s not been such a smooth ride for the IEBC. Up to this point it s not been such a smooth ride for the IEBC. Recently the National Super Alliance of opposition parties was up in arms about the IEBC s printing of 1.2-million extra ballot papers, fearing rigging, but the body said it was to provide for spoilt ballots. Recently the National Super Alliance of opposition parties was up in arms about the IEBC s printing of 1.2-million extra ballot papers, fearing rigging, but the body said it was to provide for spoilt ballots. Recently the National Super Alliance of opposition parties was up in arms about the IEBC s printing of 1.2-million extra ballot papers, fearing rigging, but the body said it was to provide for spoilt ballots. There have also been questions about the integrity of its officials, a bribery scandal, and the body s general technical ability to run sound elections. There have also been questions about the integrity of its officials, a bribery scandal, and the body s general technical ability to run sound elections. There have also been questions about the integrity of its officials, a bribery scandal, and the body s general technical ability to run sound elections. Political analyst and elections watcher Nanjala Nyabola said, There are a lot more question marks than I would like. Political analyst and elections watcher Nanjala Nyabola said, There are a lot more question marks than I would like. Political analyst and elections watcher Nanjala Nyabola said, There are a lot more question marks than I would like. These relate to how security, access to the polls and disputes would be handled by the IEBC. So far we have had one or two really big disputes and a number of smaller ones. I see a lot of question marks around the ability of the commission to arbitrate the disputes, she said. These relate to how security, access to the polls and disputes would be handled by the IEBC. So far we have had one or two really big disputes and a number of smaller ones. I see a lot of question marks around the ability of the commission to arbitrate the disputes, she said. These relate to how security, access to the polls and disputes would be handled by the IEBC. So far we have had one or two really big disputes and a number of smaller ones. I see a lot of question marks around the ability of the commission to arbitrate the disputes, she said. She added that the courts were the last resort and there were even question marks around whether they could handle disputes effectively. She added that the courts were the last resort and there were even question marks around whether they could handle disputes effectively. She added that the courts were the last resort and there were even question marks around whether they could handle disputes effectively. As for the IEBC, accused by the opposition of bowing to the governing Jubilee Party, Nyabula said it was interpreting the law in a conservative manner while the opposition wanted to see a more radical interpretation of the law . As for the IEBC, accused by the opposition of bowing to the governing Jubilee Party, Nyabula said it was interpreting the law in a conservative manner while the opposition wanted to see a more radical interpretation of the law . As for the IEBC, accused by the opposition of bowing to the governing Jubilee Party, Nyabula said it was interpreting the law in a conservative manner while the opposition wanted to see a more radical interpretation of the law . She said this was true for a lot of institutions tasked with ensuring credible elections, such as the judiciary, parliament, and the police. The way they are interpreting their mandate and function leans towards preserving the status quo, she said. She said this was true for a lot of institutions tasked with ensuring credible elections, such as the judiciary, parliament, and the police. The way they are interpreting their mandate and function leans towards preserving the status quo, she said. She said this was true for a lot of institutions tasked with ensuring credible elections, such as the judiciary, parliament, and the police. The way they are interpreting their mandate and function leans towards preserving the status quo, she said. One example was the IEBC s failure to act against the placement of advertisements about government achievements in the six weeks before the election. There are clear-cut rules about this, but the body s failure to do these small things could in the end be significant when it came to bigger things, she said. One example was the IEBC s failure to act against the placement of advertisements about government achievements in the six weeks before the election. There are clear-cut rules about this, but the body s failure to do these small things could in the end be significant when it came to bigger things, she said. One example was the IEBC s failure to act against the placement of advertisements about government achievements in the six weeks before the election. There are clear-cut rules about this, but the body s failure to do these small things could in the end be significant when it came to bigger things, she said. The election is determined by the institution that counts the votes. If it s not strong, then the election becomes a big giant question mark. The election is determined by the institution that counts the votes. If it s not strong, then the election becomes a big giant question mark. The election is determined by the institution that counts the votes. If it s not strong, then the election becomes a big giant question mark. In Nairobi on Tuesday some civil society supporters gathered in Uhuru Park where only on Sunday Kenyatta presided over a peace prayer rally for the elections. In Nairobi on Tuesday some civil society supporters gathered in Uhuru Park where only on Sunday Kenyatta presided over a peace prayer rally for the elections. In Nairobi on Tuesday some civil society supporters gathered in Uhuru Park where only on Sunday Kenyatta presided over a peace prayer rally for the elections. They asked for speedy investigations into Msando s murder, and justice. They also want a vote with integrity. Kenyan authorities have five more days to ensure this is possible. DM They asked for speedy investigations into Msando s murder, and justice. They also want a vote with integrity. Kenyan authorities have five more days to ensure this is possible. DM They asked for speedy investigations into Msando s murder, and justice. They also want a vote with integrity. Kenyan authorities have five more days to ensure this is possible. DM DM Photo: Members of the civil society stand with placards to protest against the killing of Chris Msando, the ICT manager at the Kenya's Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC), in Nairobi, Kenya, 01 August 2017. Chebukati urged public not to speculate on Msando's death. Msando, who was in charge of the electronic voting system, went missing on 28 July before his body, with alleged signs of torture, was found on the outskirts of Nairobi on 31 July. Kenya will hold general elections on 08 August. EPA/DAI KUROKAWA Photo: Members of the civil society stand with placards to protest against the killing of Chris Msando, the ICT manager at the Kenya's Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC), in Nairobi, Kenya, 01 August 2017. Chebukati urged public not to speculate on Msando's death. Msando, who was in charge of the electronic voting system, went missing on 28 July before his body, with alleged signs of torture, was found on the outskirts of Nairobi on 31 July. Kenya will hold general elections on 08 August. EPA/DAI KUROKAWA Photo: Members of the civil society stand with placards to protest against the killing of Chris Msando, the ICT manager at the Kenya's Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC), in Nairobi, Kenya, 01 August 2017. Chebukati urged public not to speculate on Msando's death. Msando, who was in charge of the electronic voting system, went missing on 28 July before his body, with alleged signs of torture, was found on the outskirts of Nairobi on 31 July. Kenya will hold general elections on 08 August. EPA/DAI KUROKAWA Jill of all trades but really, mistress of none, Carien has of late been a political tourist chasing elections and summits in various parts of the world, especially in Africa. After spending her student days at political rallies in South Africa right through the country's first democratic elections in 1994, and after an extended working holiday in London, Carien started working for newspapers full-time in 2003. She's pretty much had her share of reporting on South African politics, attending gatherings and attracting trolls, but still finds herself attracted to it like a moth to a veld fire. Her ultimate ambition in life is to become a travelling chocolate writer of international fame.