For years, the influential weekly news and opinion journal The New Republic had a popular feature, Old Conventional Wisdom New Conventional Wisdom . It took a wry, ironic look at a controversial, much-talked about issue that was suddenly subjected to a total flip-flop in the way the issue was being framed in public discussion. For years, the influential weekly news and opinion journal The New Republic had a popular feature, Old Conventional Wisdom New Conventional Wisdom . It took a wry, ironic look at a controversial, much-talked about issue that was suddenly subjected to a total flip-flop in the way the issue was being framed in public discussion. For years, the influential weekly news and opinion journal For years, the influential weekly news and opinion journal For years, the influential weekly news and opinion journal The New Republic The New Republic had a popular feature, Old Conventional Wisdom New Conventional Wisdom . It took a wry, ironic look at a controversial, much-talked about issue that was suddenly subjected to a total flip-flop in the way the issue was being framed in public discussion. had a popular feature, Old Conventional Wisdom New Conventional Wisdom . It took a wry, ironic look at a controversial, much-talked about issue that was suddenly subjected to a total flip-flop in the way the issue was being framed in public discussion. had a popular feature, Old Conventional Wisdom New Conventional Wisdom . It took a wry, ironic look at a controversial, much-talked about issue that was suddenly subjected to a total flip-flop in the way the issue was being framed in public discussion. Now, think about how that might look with the new US president as something very much like that has just happened with his standing. Back when Trump had just been elected and as he came into office, the ever-present sky-is-falling rhetoric focused on the near-apocalyptic consequences to the US and the world by virtue of his nativist populist agenda that would be achieved, once he began wielding his avenging angel of a policy sword on national issues, draining that Washington swamp, and overturning the placid assumptions of the past 70 years of the international order. Now, think about how that might look with the new US president as something very much like that has just happened with his standing. Back when Trump had just been elected and as he came into office, the ever-present sky-is-falling rhetoric focused on the near-apocalyptic consequences to the US and the world by virtue of his nativist populist agenda that would be achieved, once he began wielding his avenging angel of a policy sword on national issues, draining that Washington swamp, and overturning the placid assumptions of the past 70 years of the international order. Now, think about how that might look with the new US president as something very much like that has just happened with his standing. Back when Trump had just been elected and as he came into office, the ever-present sky-is-falling rhetoric focused on the near-apocalyptic consequences to the US and the world by virtue of his nativist populist agenda that would be achieved, once he began wielding his avenging angel of a policy sword on national issues, draining that Washington swamp, and overturning the placid assumptions of the past 70 years of the international order. But, in the wake of Trump s astonishing failures to achieve judicially upheld immigration restrictions or gain action from a Republican-controlled Congress to meet his promise to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, a new conventional wisdom is starting to emerge instead. In this new, alternative view, the real problem is not the dreadful effects of the total achievement of Donald Trump s near-messianic vision of the future. Rather, it is the likelihood that he will be unable to achieve much of anything because of the chaos and lack of discipline in his administration or in his thoughs. Accordingly, the result of such rough water in the White House will be government-wide policy confusion and managerial chaos as the Trump administration proves it is simply unable to keep a sustained focus on any cogent path or vision. But, in the wake of Trump s astonishing failures to achieve judicially upheld immigration restrictions or gain action from a Republican-controlled Congress to meet his promise to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, a new conventional wisdom is starting to emerge instead. In this new, alternative view, the real problem is not the dreadful effects of the total achievement of Donald Trump s near-messianic vision of the future. Rather, it is the likelihood that he will be unable to achieve much of anything because of the chaos and lack of discipline in his administration or in his thoughs. Accordingly, the result of such rough water in the White House will be government-wide policy confusion and managerial chaos as the Trump administration proves it is simply unable to keep a sustained focus on any cogent path or vision. But, in the wake of Trump s astonishing failures to achieve judicially upheld immigration restrictions or gain action from a Republican-controlled Congress to meet his promise to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, a new conventional wisdom is starting to emerge instead. In this new, alternative view, the real problem is not the dreadful effects of the total achievement of Donald Trump s near-messianic vision of the future. Rather, it is the likelihood that he will be unable to achieve much of anything because of the chaos and lack of discipline in his administration or in his thoughs. Accordingly, the result of such rough water in the White House will be government-wide policy confusion and managerial chaos as the Trump administration proves it is simply unable to keep a sustained focus on any cogent path or vision. If this latter conventional wisdom prevails, the inevitable and untidy unravelling of the Trump administration s reputation and effectiveness as a result of his campaign staff s entanglements with Russian electoral shenanigans; the continued incoherence and sometimes manic behaviour in its foreign relations with American allies; its ham-handed, ineffectual trade policies; its inability to achieve any meaningful tax reforms; its fumbling, stumbling, bumbling over coping with the federal budget, and the thumbing of the president s metaphorical nose at the entire world over climate change, will all contribute to a flailing, failing administration for four more painful years. If this latter conventional wisdom prevails, the inevitable and untidy unravelling of the Trump administration s reputation and effectiveness as a result of his campaign staff s entanglements with Russian electoral shenanigans; the continued incoherence and sometimes manic behaviour in its foreign relations with American allies; its ham-handed, ineffectual trade policies; its inability to achieve any meaningful tax reforms; its fumbling, stumbling, bumbling over coping with the federal budget, and the thumbing of the president s metaphorical nose at the entire world over climate change, will all contribute to a flailing, failing administration for four more painful years. If this latter conventional wisdom prevails, the inevitable and untidy unravelling of the Trump administration s reputation and effectiveness as a result of his campaign staff s entanglements with Russian electoral shenanigans; the continued incoherence and sometimes manic behaviour in its foreign relations with American allies; its ham-handed, ineffectual trade policies; its inability to achieve any meaningful tax reforms; its fumbling, stumbling, bumbling over coping with the federal budget, and the thumbing of the president s metaphorical nose at the entire world over climate change, will all contribute to a flailing, failing administration for four more painful years. By 2020, such an abysmal effort will have achieved very little of any consequence except for having achieved a weakened America; one that much more tangental to world events, and one increasingly unable to affect the trajectory of such events. By 2020, such an abysmal effort will have achieved very little of any consequence except for having achieved a weakened America; one that much more tangental to world events, and one increasingly unable to affect the trajectory of such events. By 2020, such an abysmal effort will have achieved very little of any consequence except for having achieved a weakened America; one that much more tangental to world events, and one increasingly unable to affect the trajectory of such events. Around 170 ago, back in 1856, Pennsylvania Democrat James Buchanan was elected president. Given a long career in government, Buchanan was seen as an ideal choice for president. He brought skills at diplomacy, a mastery of the political and financial issues of the day, and a thorough background in government personalities and processes. But he became paralysed in the face of the crucial issue of his time. This was the increasingly shrill debate about how the country would or could cope with either the continuation of slavery or its abolition within America s borders, and thus the ever more violent divisions in the country over this issue. Around 170 ago, back in 1856, Pennsylvania Democrat James Buchanan was elected president. Given a long career in government, Buchanan was seen as an ideal choice for president. He brought skills at diplomacy, a mastery of the political and financial issues of the day, and a thorough background in government personalities and processes. But he became paralysed in the face of the crucial issue of his time. This was the increasingly shrill debate about how the country would or could cope with either the continuation of slavery or its abolition within America s borders, and thus the ever more violent divisions in the country over this issue. Around 170 ago, back in 1856, Pennsylvania Democrat James Buchanan was elected president. Given a long career in government, Buchanan was seen as an ideal choice for president. He brought skills at diplomacy, a mastery of the political and financial issues of the day, and a thorough background in government personalities and processes. But he became paralysed in the face of the crucial issue of his time. This was the increasingly shrill debate about how the country would or could cope with either the continuation of slavery or its abolition within America s borders, and thus the ever more violent divisions in the country over this issue. Despite Buchanan s resume, experience and connections, the country became increasingly ungovernable. In 1860, that year s presidential election produced the selection of an anti-slavery president in the person of Abraham Lincoln to take office in the spring. But while Buchanan was still office, in the face of the impending secession of seven states where slavery remained legal, Buchanan increasingly withdrew from the public eye rather than deal with such an existential challenge. Instead he told his friends he simply longed for the end of his term to arrive so he could quickly retreat back to the peace of his estate in rural Pennsylvania and be done with public life. Despite Buchanan s resume, experience and connections, the country became increasingly ungovernable. In 1860, that year s presidential election produced the selection of an anti-slavery president in the person of Abraham Lincoln to take office in the spring. But while Buchanan was still office, in the face of the impending secession of seven states where slavery remained legal, Buchanan increasingly withdrew from the public eye rather than deal with such an existential challenge. Instead he told his friends he simply longed for the end of his term to arrive so he could quickly retreat back to the peace of his estate in rural Pennsylvania and be done with public life. Despite Buchanan s resume, experience and connections, the country became increasingly ungovernable. In 1860, that year s presidential election produced the selection of an anti-slavery president in the person of Abraham Lincoln to take office in the spring. But while Buchanan was still office, in the face of the impending secession of seven states where slavery remained legal, Buchanan increasingly withdrew from the public eye rather than deal with such an existential challenge. Instead he told his friends he simply longed for the end of his term to arrive so he could quickly retreat back to the peace of his estate in rural Pennsylvania and be done with public life. Now, nobody would want to argue that James Buchanan and Donald Trump are equivalent. They are very different types of men. Whereas Buchanan was careful and diplomatic, and a seeker of compromise and accommodation, Donald Trump is brash and blunt, with an opinion (or two or three) on everything. But Trump also seems determined not to learn from his mistakes or from those of any of his predecessors. Instead, he seems determined to double down on each increasingly provocative statement. Now, nobody would want to argue that James Buchanan and Donald Trump are equivalent. They are very different types of men. Whereas Buchanan was careful and diplomatic, and a seeker of compromise and accommodation, Donald Trump is brash and blunt, with an opinion (or two or three) on everything. But Trump also seems determined not to learn from his mistakes or from those of any of his predecessors. Instead, he seems determined to double down on each increasingly provocative statement. Now, nobody would want to argue that James Buchanan and Donald Trump are equivalent. They are very different types of men. Whereas Buchanan was careful and diplomatic, and a seeker of compromise and accommodation, Donald Trump is brash and blunt, with an opinion (or two or three) on everything. But Trump also seems determined not to learn from his mistakes or from those of any of his predecessors. Instead, he seems determined to double down on each increasingly provocative statement. Rather than seeking out broader support and advice from an ever-wider array of advisers, he seems determined to lay the blame for his failures on others, lashing out wildly at Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, the media, the intelligence community, other Democrats, Republicans, federal judges, International trade partners, and allies everyone save for Vladimir Putin and the Russian government. For support in his administration, going forward, he seems inexplicably determined to draw the wagons ever more tightly, bringing yet more of his family circle into offices in the White House this time, his daughter to help him run what is still just a skeleton crew of an administration. There seems no effort to find the kind of speaking uncomfortable truths to power advisers who can help him move beyond his mistakes and outside his cozy bubble of lazy thoughts and comic book-style admonitions and the ideological bromides of his most malignant advisers. Rather than seeking out broader support and advice from an ever-wider array of advisers, he seems determined to lay the blame for his failures on others, lashing out wildly at Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, the media, the intelligence community, other Democrats, Republicans, federal judges, International trade partners, and allies everyone save for Vladimir Putin and the Russian government. For support in his administration, going forward, he seems inexplicably determined to draw the wagons ever more tightly, bringing yet more of his family circle into offices in the White House this time, his daughter to help him run what is still just a skeleton crew of an administration. There seems no effort to find the kind of speaking uncomfortable truths to power advisers who can help him move beyond his mistakes and outside his cozy bubble of lazy thoughts and comic book-style admonitions and the ideological bromides of his most malignant advisers. Rather than seeking out broader support and advice from an ever-wider array of advisers, he seems determined to lay the blame for his failures on others, lashing out wildly at Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, the media, the intelligence community, other Democrats, Republicans, federal judges, International trade partners, and allies everyone save for Vladimir Putin and the Russian government. For support in his administration, going forward, he seems inexplicably determined to draw the wagons ever more tightly, bringing yet more of his family circle into offices in the White House this time, his daughter to help him run what is still just a skeleton crew of an administration. There seems no effort to find the kind of speaking uncomfortable truths to power advisers who can help him move beyond his mistakes and outside his cozy bubble of lazy thoughts and comic book-style admonitions and the ideological bromides of his most malignant advisers. In the end, the judgement of historians has been that James Buchanan s time in office represented a major failure of a presidency, with many observers marking him down as the country s worst president since the office was created. (Some would argue that Buchanan must share such a dreadful honour with Herbert Hoover, Andrew Johnson, or Richard Nixon, but each of these men had some useful aspects and accomplishments in their time in office, if only barely.) But Buchanan stands unique as a man who let the country fall to pieces in his final months in office. In the end, the judgement of historians has been that James Buchanan s time in office represented a major failure of a presidency, with many observers marking him down as the country s worst president since the office was created. (Some would argue that Buchanan must share such a dreadful honour with Herbert Hoover, Andrew Johnson, or Richard Nixon, but each of these men had some useful aspects and accomplishments in their time in office, if only barely.) But Buchanan stands unique as a man who let the country fall to pieces in his final months in office. In the end, the judgement of historians has been that James Buchanan s time in office represented a major failure of a presidency, with many observers marking him down as the country s worst president since the office was created. (Some would argue that Buchanan must share such a dreadful honour with Herbert Hoover, Andrew Johnson, or Richard Nixon, but each of these men had some useful aspects and accomplishments in their time in office, if only barely.) But Buchanan stands unique as a man who let the country fall to pieces in his final months in office. Donald Trump, of course, has only been in office for 10 weeks. Even so, given his now-evident incapacity to learn from his mistakes, he runs the risk of making a strong run at Buchanan s place in history. In the end, if Trump s presidency is a failure, however, it may well come less from his domestic policy flops and failures than from his fatal miscalculations in dealing with the 21st century s rising international power China. In a provocative column the other day, entitled Trump Is a Chinese Agent , New York Times writer Tom Friedman had argued: Donald Trump, of course, has only been in office for 10 weeks. Even so, given his now-evident incapacity to learn from his mistakes, he runs the risk of making a strong run at Buchanan s place in history. In the end, if Trump s presidency is a failure, however, it may well come less from his domestic policy flops and failures than from his fatal miscalculations in dealing with the 21st century s rising international power China. In a provocative column the other day, entitled Trump Is a Chinese Agent , New York Times writer Tom Friedman had argued: Donald Trump, of course, has only been in office for 10 weeks. Even so, given his now-evident incapacity to learn from his mistakes, he runs the risk of making a strong run at Buchanan s place in history. In the end, if Trump s presidency is a failure, however, it may well come less from his domestic policy flops and failures than from his fatal miscalculations in dealing with the 21st century s rising international power China. In a provocative column the other day, entitled Trump Is a Chinese Agent , Donald Trump, of course, has only been in office for 10 weeks. Even so, given his now-evident incapacity to learn from his mistakes, he runs the risk of making a strong run at Buchanan s place in history. In the end, if Trump s presidency is a failure, however, it may well come less from his domestic policy flops and failures than from his fatal miscalculations in dealing with the 21st century s rising international power China. In a provocative column the other day, entitled Trump Is a Chinese Agent , Donald Trump, of course, has only been in office for 10 weeks. Even so, given his now-evident incapacity to learn from his mistakes, he runs the risk of making a strong run at Buchanan s place in history. In the end, if Trump s presidency is a failure, however, it may well come less from his domestic policy flops and failures than from his fatal miscalculations in dealing with the 21st century s rising international power China. In a provocative column the other day, entitled Trump Is a Chinese Agent , New York Times New York Times writer Tom Friedman had argued: writer Tom Friedman had argued: writer Tom Friedman had argued: The big story everyone is chasing is whether President Trump is a Russian stooge. Wrong. That s all a smoke screen. Trump is actually a Chinese agent. He is clearly out to make China great again. Just look at the facts. Trump took office promising to fix our trade imbalance with China, and what s the first thing he did? He threw away a U.S.-designed free-trade deal with 11 other Pacific nations a pact whose members make up 40 percent of global G.D.P. The Trans-Pacific Partnership was based largely on U.S. economic interests, benefiting our fastest-growing technologies and agribusinesses, and had more labour, environmental and human rights standards than any trade agreement ever. And it excluded China. It was our baby, shaping the future of trade in Asia. Imagine if Trump were negotiating with China now as not only the U.S. president but also as head of a 12-nation trading bloc based on our values and interests. That s called l-e-v-e-r-a-g-e, and Trump just threw it away because he promised to in the campaign without, I d bet, ever reading TPP. What a chump! The big story everyone is chasing is whether President Trump is a Russian stooge. Wrong. That s all a smoke screen. Trump is actually a Chinese agent. He is clearly out to make China great again. Just look at the facts. Trump took office promising to fix our trade imbalance with China, and what s the first thing he did? He threw away a U.S.-designed free-trade deal with 11 other Pacific nations a pact whose members make up 40 percent of global G.D.P. The Trans-Pacific Partnership was based largely on U.S. economic interests, benefiting our fastest-growing technologies and agribusinesses, and had more labour, environmental and human rights standards than any trade agreement ever. And it excluded China. It was our baby, shaping the future of trade in Asia. Imagine if Trump were negotiating with China now as not only the U.S. president but also as head of a 12-nation trading bloc based on our values and interests. That s called l-e-v-e-r-a-g-e, and Trump just threw it away because he promised to in the campaign without, I d bet, ever reading TPP. What a chump! The big story everyone is chasing is whether President Trump is a Russian stooge. Wrong. That s all a smoke screen. Trump is actually a Chinese agent. He is clearly out to make China great again. Just look at the facts. Trump took office promising to fix our trade imbalance with China, and what s the first thing he did? He threw away a U.S.-designed free-trade deal with 11 other Pacific nations a pact whose members make up 40 percent of global G.D.P. The Trans-Pacific Partnership was based largely on U.S. economic interests, benefiting our fastest-growing technologies and agribusinesses, and had more labour, environmental and human rights standards than any trade agreement ever. And it excluded China. It was our baby, shaping the future of trade in Asia. Imagine if Trump were negotiating with China now as not only the U.S. president but also as head of a 12-nation trading bloc based on our values and interests. That s called l-e-v-e-r-a-g-e, and Trump just threw it away because he promised to in the campaign without, I d bet, ever reading TPP. What a chump! Friedman concluded his column by saying, Friedman concluded his column by saying, Friedman concluded his column by saying, So you tell me that Trump is not a Chinese agent. The only other explanation is that he s ignorant and unread that he s never studied the issues or connected the dots between them so Big Coal and Big Oil easily manipulated him into being their chump, who just tweeted out their talking points to win votes here and there without any thought to grand strategy. Surely that couldn t be true? So you tell me that Trump is not a Chinese agent. The only other explanation is that he s ignorant and unread that he s never studied the issues or connected the dots between them so Big Coal and Big Oil easily manipulated him into being their chump, who just tweeted out their talking points to win votes here and there without any thought to grand strategy. Surely that couldn t be true? So you tell me that Trump is not a Chinese agent. The only other explanation is that he s ignorant and unread that he s never studied the issues or connected the dots between them so Big Coal and Big Oil easily manipulated him into being their chump, who just tweeted out their talking points to win votes here and there without any thought to grand strategy. Surely that couldn t be true? A harsh judgement, maybe, or, perhaps, a very sadly prescient one. If things go on as they have been for the remaining three years and some months of this presidency, historians a century from now may well look back at Donald Trump s presidency, per Friedman s view, and try to evaluate not how great a man he was, but whether he belonged on the list of epic failures. But perhaps they will be doing their writing in Chinese. DM A harsh judgement, maybe, or, perhaps, a very sadly prescient one. If things go on as they have been for the remaining three years and some months of this presidency, historians a century from now may well look back at Donald Trump s presidency, per Friedman s view, and try to evaluate not how great a man he was, but whether he belonged on the list of epic failures. But perhaps they will be doing their writing in Chinese. DM A harsh judgement, maybe, or, perhaps, a very sadly prescient one. If things go on as they have been for the remaining three years and some months of this presidency, historians a century from now may well look back at Donald Trump s presidency, per Friedman s view, and try to evaluate not how great a man he was, but whether he belonged on the list of epic failures. But perhaps they will be doing their writing in Chinese. A harsh judgement, maybe, or, perhaps, a very sadly prescient one. If things go on as they have been for the remaining three years and some months of this presidency, historians a century from now may well look back at Donald Trump s presidency, per Friedman s view, and try to evaluate not how great a man he was, but whether he belonged on the list of epic failures. But perhaps they will be doing their writing in Chinese. A harsh judgement, maybe, or, perhaps, a very sadly prescient one. If things go on as they have been for the remaining three years and some months of this presidency, historians a century from now may well look back at Donald Trump s presidency, per Friedman s view, and try to evaluate not how great a man he was, but whether he belonged on the list of epic failures. But perhaps they will be doing their writing in Chinese. DM Photo: US President Donald J. Trump waits for Prime Minister of Denmark Lars Lokke Rasmussen to arrive to the West Wing of the White House in Washington, DC, USA, 30 March 2017. EPA/SHAWN THEW Photo: US President Donald J. Trump waits for Prime Minister of Denmark Lars Lokke Rasmussen to arrive to the West Wing of the White House in Washington, DC, USA, 30 March 2017. EPA/SHAWN THEW Photo: US President Donald J. Trump waits for Prime Minister of Denmark Lars Lokke Rasmussen to arrive to the West Wing of the White House in Washington, DC, USA, 30 March 2017. EPA/SHAWN THEW