On Friday the Constitutional Court ruled ruled provided Sassa account information to any third party despite the terms and conditions contained in the agreement with the card holders, and does not cross-sell any services to the SASSA account holders , a statement from the bank said. Grindrod Bank nets approximately 30 cents profit per account per month on these Sassa accounts, which amounts to R3 million per month after tax. Grindrod Bank confirms that the debit cards and the related bank accounts will continue to be functional in order to receive their SASSA grant payments after 1 April 2017, said Grindrod Bank CEO, David Polkinghorne. epartment of Social Development to immediately initiate a process to fully comply with the directives of the Constitutional Court and the prescripts of the law. The regrettable events over the past few weeks were unnecessary and should have never happened, the statement said. overnment to thoroughly investigate actions of those involved and act decisively against those responsible . It is unacceptable that such a critical aspect of our social security net, affecting the security and livelihood of the most vulnerable in our country, was not dealt with much better in a speedy manner to avoid the unnecessary panic and anxiety caused, the statement read. The ANC further calls for harsh consequence management as a deterrent to a repeat of this matter. The Save South Africa organisation was more direct saying Dlamini should do the right thing for once she should resign, immediately but before she goes, she should pay the costs of the process from her own pocket, without belatedly trying to justify her shocking conduct. The Minister has had more than enough opportunities to show respect for her oath of office, for the Constitutional Court and for the people of South Africa. She has had more than enough time to prioritise the payment of social grants ... instead she has spent her time misleading the poor and indigent, avoiding accountability in Parliament, and blaming those who want transparency and accountability while vigorously defending her dodgy deal with a highly questionable service provider, CPS, it said. It s clear that the Minister is incapable of performing her key Constitutional function, and she must go. And if she doesn't go voluntarily, the President should finally recognise that this is indeed a crisis, and that the Minister is indeed responsible. And he should get her out of government now. And in a sign of how just strongly has tide turned, NET1's second biggest shareholder, Allan Gray (15.58%) stated: We asked Net1 in writing to make every effort possible to find an interim solution to ensure that grants are paid by 1 April. As shareholders we would be happy if this means Net1 foregoes all profits on the contract extension. Allan Gray s investment in Net1 is not based on the renewal of the SASSA contract. It is based on the company s track record of successfully implementing reliable and robust payment technologies, which comfortably handle millions of transactions, both on- and offline, across various different businesses and countries. DM DM