We cannot submit to this outrage it is time to fight. We cannot submit to this outrage it is time to fight. We cannot submit to this outrage it is time to fight. The Save South Africa campaign calls on all South Africans who care about their country to use this moment to say: This far, and no further. The Save South Africa campaign calls on all South Africans who care about their country to use this moment to say: This far, and no further. The Save South Africa campaign calls on all South Africans who care about their country to use this moment to say: This far, and no further. We are urging every woman and man, old or young, to make their way to Pretoria and assemble at Church Square, outside the National Treasury, at 10am on Friday to show their objection to this Gupta-inspired coup. We are urging every woman and man, old or young, to make their way to Pretoria and assemble at Church Square, outside the National Treasury, at 10am on Friday to show their objection to this Gupta-inspired coup. We are urging every woman and man, old or young, to make their way to Pretoria and assemble at Church Square, outside the National Treasury, at 10am on Friday to show their objection to this Gupta-inspired coup. Bring your flags, bring your family and friends, and occupy central Pretoria. This is the only way we can stop the capture of National Treasury, and prevent the Gupta proxies from getting access to our money. Bring your flags, bring your family and friends, and occupy central Pretoria. This is the only way we can stop the capture of National Treasury, and prevent the Gupta proxies from getting access to our money. Bring your flags, bring your family and friends, and occupy central Pretoria. This is the only way we can stop the capture of National Treasury, and prevent the Gupta proxies from getting access to our money. We must #OccupyTreasury. We must march to the Union Buildings, and similar marches should take place on Parliament. We must join hands in common cause and show that we are not prepared to accept any further abuse of power and the undermining of our Constitution. We must #OccupyTreasury. We must march to the Union Buildings, and similar marches should take place on Parliament. We must join hands in common cause and show that we are not prepared to accept any further abuse of power and the undermining of our Constitution. We must #OccupyTreasury. We must march to the Union Buildings, and similar marches should take place on Parliament. We must join hands in common cause and show that we are not prepared to accept any further abuse of power and the undermining of our Constitution. The scale of the reshuffle is massive far bigger, even, than the numbers suggest. The scale of the reshuffle is massive far bigger, even, than the numbers suggest. The scale of the reshuffle is massive far bigger, even, than the numbers suggest. First, the Guptas have anointed their proxies to loot National Treasury at their behest. It is clear that they intend to make their first order of business the approval of a banking licence for the Gupta proxies at Habib Bank. First, the Guptas have anointed their proxies to loot National Treasury at their behest. It is clear that they intend to make their first order of business the approval of a banking licence for the Gupta proxies at Habib Bank. First, the Guptas have anointed their proxies to loot National Treasury at their behest. It is clear that they intend to make their first order of business the approval of a banking licence for the Gupta proxies at Habib Bank. On top of this, they have put pliable ministers in charge of other portfolios that are central to their grand plan: On top of this, they have put pliable ministers in charge of other portfolios that are central to their grand plan: On top of this, they have put pliable ministers in charge of other portfolios that are central to their grand plan: We have to stand up now to defend our democracy. We have to stand up now to defend our democracy. We have to stand up now to defend our democracy. We must chase Zuma and his cronies out of office. We must make this their final move. We cannot wait any longer. We must take this defence of democracy to the streets. We must chase Zuma and his cronies out of office. We must make this their final move. We cannot wait any longer. We must take this defence of democracy to the streets. We must chase Zuma and his cronies out of office. We must make this their final move. We cannot wait any longer. We must take this defence of democracy to the streets. We must all act, to Save South Africa now. DM We must all act, to Save South Africa now. DM We must all act, to Save South Africa now. DM DM