 Thirteen other ministers and deputy minister were also fired. welcomed the reshuffle. The ANCWL applauded the President for being cognisant of the gender parity policy of the ANC and affirming women leadership through his decision, as he appointed 50% women ministers and 60% women deputy ministers. The ANCYL said it was excited, happy, overjoyed and jubilant adding that it maintained, the belief that no one is above the ANC, and no one is irreplaceable . Officially the ANC, through its national spokesman, Zizi Kodwa, simply noted the reshuffle and called on its members and leaders to display unity despite having divergent views. Kodwa said national officials would meet soon on the matter and collectively give guidance and leadership to the organisation . filed an application to the Constitutional Court asking it to instruct Speaker of Parliament, Baleka Mbete to institute impeachment or disciplinary proceedings against Zuma. by the ill-timed and irrational dismissal of Gordhan. This decision, and the manner in which it was taken, is likely to cause severe damage to an economy that is in dire need of growth and jobs. The rationale for the removal of other ministers in key departments at a time when the country is beginning to make progress on a number of fronts is also questionable, it said. The South African Federation of Trade Unions (SAFTU) expressed its outrage and appealed to all South Africans to flood the streets of Pretoria and symbolically occupy the Treasury. The announcement confirms our worst fears that the country has now been plunged into its biggest crisis since 1994. We now have a government with no credibility, one which has surrendered power to powerful crony capitalist factions and delivered a slap in the face of millions of South Africans. The main issue is not the fate of individuals but the fact that this move means that Zuma s kleptocratic faction of the ANC is making a desperate bid to cling on to power The thieves and looters have been given a green light to continue and increase their manipulation of government and SOE contracts to line their pockets for as long as we allow them to get away with it, it said. By noon on Friday scores of protestors had heeded Save SA and Section 27 calls to occupy Treasury and Parliament. Addressing protestors outside Treasury Gordhan thanked them for their support over the year and half that they have been under constant attack while trying to do good, honest work for all South Africans . Gordhan said the majority of people in the ANC believed what the protestors believe and they will speak out on when they are ready . The ANC must go back to its roots again, he said to wild cheers. DM DM