This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: polity.org.za This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: polity.org.za This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: This article first appeared on Creamer Media s website: polity.org.za polity.org.za polity.org.za polity.org.za polity.org.za polity.org.za polity.org.za Last week saw a number of significant judicial decisions. These included a Constitutional Court ruling over the social grants crisis and the removal of General Berning Ntlemeza as head of the Hawks in the North Gauteng High Court. These findings are symptomatic of the broad range of crises that grip South Africa and which have enveloped the country for some years. The all-round crisis extends beyond the political, on which this article focuses. Although many issues now require resolution in the courts it is not from there that the crises emanate. Last week saw a number of significant judicial decisions. These included a Constitutional Court ruling over the social grants crisis and the removal of General Berning Ntlemeza as head of the Hawks in the North Gauteng High Court. These findings are symptomatic of the broad range of crises that grip South Africa and which have enveloped the country for some years. The all-round crisis extends beyond the political, on which this article focuses. Although many issues now require resolution in the courts it is not from there that the crises emanate. Last week saw a number of significant judicial decisions. These included a Constitutional Court ruling over the social grants crisis and the removal of General Berning Ntlemeza as head of the Hawks in the North Gauteng High Court. These findings are symptomatic of the broad range of crises that grip South Africa and which have enveloped the country for some years. The all-round crisis extends beyond the political, on which this article focuses. Although many issues now require resolution in the courts it is not from there that the crises emanate. One of its symptoms is that it is difficult to resolve burning political issues through political institutions. Hence the repeated recourse to courts. South Africa has advanced constitutional and democratic institutions, but these have become paralysed with respect to resolving critical issues in the country. One of its symptoms is that it is difficult to resolve burning political issues through political institutions. Hence the repeated recourse to courts. South Africa has advanced constitutional and democratic institutions, but these have become paralysed with respect to resolving critical issues in the country. One of its symptoms is that it is difficult to resolve burning political issues through political institutions. Hence the repeated recourse to courts. South Africa has advanced constitutional and democratic institutions, but these have become paralysed with respect to resolving critical issues in the country. Citizens cannot expect MPs to act in their interests despite the people repeatedly being invoked as the driving force for ANC action. And even ANC MPs are without power as legislators not specifically in relation to the ANC as an organisation, but regarding Jacob Zuma, who displays imperviousness to the rules and conventions of his office. Citizens cannot expect MPs to act in their interests despite the people repeatedly being invoked as the driving force for ANC action. And even ANC MPs are without power as legislators not specifically in relation to the ANC as an organisation, but regarding Jacob Zuma, who displays imperviousness to the rules and conventions of his office. Citizens cannot expect MPs to act in their interests despite the people repeatedly being invoked as the driving force for ANC action. And even ANC MPs are without power as legislators not specifically in relation to the ANC as an organisation, but regarding Jacob Zuma, who displays imperviousness to the rules and conventions of his office. ANC MPs periodically murmur their dissatisfaction, or sometimes more dramatically voice unhappiness over Zuma s leadership, but have lost the capacity to respond to urgent matters of accountability. This is demonstrated in their overall passivity, or silent or open defence of Bathabile Dlamini, Minister of Social Development, over the social grants crisis. Even though there have been moments of courage, MPs are members of a party in Parliament where one cannot just go it alone. ANC MPs periodically murmur their dissatisfaction, or sometimes more dramatically voice unhappiness over Zuma s leadership, but have lost the capacity to respond to urgent matters of accountability. This is demonstrated in their overall passivity, or silent or open defence of Bathabile Dlamini, Minister of Social Development, over the social grants crisis. Even though there have been moments of courage, MPs are members of a party in Parliament where one cannot just go it alone. ANC MPs periodically murmur their dissatisfaction, or sometimes more dramatically voice unhappiness over Zuma s leadership, but have lost the capacity to respond to urgent matters of accountability. This is demonstrated in their overall passivity, or silent or open defence of Bathabile Dlamini, Minister of Social Development, over the social grants crisis. Even though there have been moments of courage, MPs are members of a party in Parliament where one cannot just go it alone. And that applies beyond Parliament to all members of the leadership and the organisation. The same holds also for members of other parties. The conditions of being an MP mean that the party in Parliament operates within a collective discipline. One s private views outside are similarly affected. If they diverge, they must remain private so long as one is a party member, as Helen Zille, despite her veteran status, is now finding with her tweets on the colonial legacy. And that applies beyond Parliament to all members of the leadership and the organisation. The same holds also for members of other parties. The conditions of being an MP mean that the party in Parliament operates within a collective discipline. One s private views outside are similarly affected. If they diverge, they must remain private so long as one is a party member, as Helen Zille, despite her veteran status, is now finding with her tweets on the colonial legacy. And that applies beyond Parliament to all members of the leadership and the organisation. The same holds also for members of other parties. The conditions of being an MP mean that the party in Parliament operates within a collective discipline. One s private views outside are similarly affected. If they diverge, they must remain private so long as one is a party member, as Helen Zille, despite her veteran status, is now finding with her tweets on the colonial legacy. The question one may ask is how these decisions of the ANC that are collectively binding on MPs are arrived at. There is little evidence of significant debate preceding an instruction, though what is clear, is that uniform action is enforced. The question one may ask is how these decisions of the ANC that are collectively binding on MPs are arrived at. There is little evidence of significant debate preceding an instruction, though what is clear, is that uniform action is enforced. The question one may ask is how these decisions of the ANC that are collectively binding on MPs are arrived at. There is little evidence of significant debate preceding an instruction, though what is clear, is that uniform action is enforced. By remaining members of Parliament for the ANC, MPs are bound to an anti-democratic, anti-popular course, bound to defend a corrupt government, one that increasingly demonstrates indifference to the fate of the poor, in whose name they purport to act, as they once did act. Insofar as MPs are increasingly required to vote or applaud, and not to think, they have become increasingly robotic, as we have seen with the Nkandla debacle. By remaining members of Parliament for the ANC, MPs are bound to an anti-democratic, anti-popular course, bound to defend a corrupt government, one that increasingly demonstrates indifference to the fate of the poor, in whose name they purport to act, as they once did act. Insofar as MPs are increasingly required to vote or applaud, and not to think, they have become increasingly robotic, as we have seen with the Nkandla debacle. By remaining members of Parliament for the ANC, MPs are bound to an anti-democratic, anti-popular course, bound to defend a corrupt government, one that increasingly demonstrates indifference to the fate of the poor, in whose name they purport to act, as they once did act. Insofar as MPs are increasingly required to vote or applaud, and not to think, they have become increasingly robotic, as we have seen with the Nkandla debacle. I am not suggesting that these individuals are fools, but they operate within a political milieu that has become increasingly impatient with intellectualism. The ANC used to be a hive of ideas. There are many theories that used to be debated relating to programmes, strategies and tactics. That is no more, and the recently issued policy documents do not remedy that broader emptiness. I am not suggesting that these individuals are fools, but they operate within a political milieu that has become increasingly impatient with intellectualism. The ANC used to be a hive of ideas. There are many theories that used to be debated relating to programmes, strategies and tactics. That is no more, and the recently issued policy documents do not remedy that broader emptiness. I am not suggesting that these individuals are fools, but they operate within a political milieu that has become increasingly impatient with intellectualism. The ANC used to be a hive of ideas. There are many theories that used to be debated relating to programmes, strategies and tactics. That is no more, and the recently issued policy documents do not remedy that broader emptiness. In the case of other parties: while they were outraged over the Sassa crisis, they did not have the power to act, by virtue of being in a minority and consequently, were simply outvoted no matter the merits of their position. In the case of other parties: while they were outraged over the Sassa crisis, they did not have the power to act, by virtue of being in a minority and consequently, were simply outvoted no matter the merits of their position. In the case of other parties: while they were outraged over the Sassa crisis, they did not have the power to act, by virtue of being in a minority and consequently, were simply outvoted no matter the merits of their position. Let us examine again why there is incapacity to remedy political problems in the political domain. In the first place, considering the grants crisis, what Dlamini has done or failed to do over social grants is a variant of the indifference that the ANC has displayed more generally towards the poor. There is daily evidence of this in numerous other areas in the eviction of shack dwellers into the open skies, or failure to provide an adequate environment for schooling, clean water supplies, electricity and many other basic needs. Let us examine again why there is incapacity to remedy political problems in the political domain. In the first place, considering the grants crisis, what Dlamini has done or failed to do over social grants is a variant of the indifference that the ANC has displayed more generally towards the poor. There is daily evidence of this in numerous other areas in the eviction of shack dwellers into the open skies, or failure to provide an adequate environment for schooling, clean water supplies, electricity and many other basic needs. Let us examine again why there is incapacity to remedy political problems in the political domain. In the first place, considering the grants crisis, what Dlamini has done or failed to do over social grants is a variant of the indifference that the ANC has displayed more generally towards the poor. There is daily evidence of this in numerous other areas in the eviction of shack dwellers into the open skies, or failure to provide an adequate environment for schooling, clean water supplies, electricity and many other basic needs. This indifference co-exists with a parasitic approach to state resources, where every effort of some in leadership and their associates outside is devoted to painting Treasury in a nefarious light in order to pave the way to loot the fiscus for private benefit. Most prominent among these is the Gupta family, who have made it their business to go beyond any previous beneficiaries of Zuma s power, not only in cutting legal corners, but in entering the sphere of governance. This indifference co-exists with a parasitic approach to state resources, where every effort of some in leadership and their associates outside is devoted to painting Treasury in a nefarious light in order to pave the way to loot the fiscus for private benefit. Most prominent among these is the Gupta family, who have made it their business to go beyond any previous beneficiaries of Zuma s power, not only in cutting legal corners, but in entering the sphere of governance. This indifference co-exists with a parasitic approach to state resources, where every effort of some in leadership and their associates outside is devoted to painting Treasury in a nefarious light in order to pave the way to loot the fiscus for private benefit. Most prominent among these is the Gupta family, who have made it their business to go beyond any previous beneficiaries of Zuma s power, not only in cutting legal corners, but in entering the sphere of governance. State capture is more audacious insofar as it aims to take over sovereign state functions. The most obvious examples are people like Des van Rooyen and Mosebenzi Zwane, who have no clear reason to be there other than serving the Guptas, but find themselves in the Cabinet. It is also dramatically illustrated at a bureaucratic level when the Gupta family allegedly intervened directly with former head of GCIS, Themba Maseko, and sought to instruct him to perform his duties in a way that benefited their enterprises. State capture is more audacious insofar as it aims to take over sovereign state functions. The most obvious examples are people like Des van Rooyen and Mosebenzi Zwane, who have no clear reason to be there other than serving the Guptas, but find themselves in the Cabinet. It is also dramatically illustrated at a bureaucratic level when the Gupta family allegedly intervened directly with former head of GCIS, Themba Maseko, and sought to instruct him to perform his duties in a way that benefited their enterprises. State capture is more audacious insofar as it aims to take over sovereign state functions. The most obvious examples are people like Des van Rooyen and Mosebenzi Zwane, who have no clear reason to be there other than serving the Guptas, but find themselves in the Cabinet. It is also dramatically illustrated at a bureaucratic level when the Gupta family allegedly intervened directly with former head of GCIS, Themba Maseko, and sought to instruct him to perform his duties in a way that benefited their enterprises. Insofar as state capture co-exists with benefits to some, the concern of those who have been captured has not been what happens to the poor, for the poor are not their core constituency any more. The captured are now accountable to their captors. And that leads to mutual, albeit uneven, financial rewards. Insofar as state capture co-exists with benefits to some, the concern of those who have been captured has not been what happens to the poor, for the poor are not their core constituency any more. The captured are now accountable to their captors. And that leads to mutual, albeit uneven, financial rewards. Insofar as state capture co-exists with benefits to some, the concern of those who have been captured has not been what happens to the poor, for the poor are not their core constituency any more. The captured are now accountable to their captors. And that leads to mutual, albeit uneven, financial rewards. But the ANC leadership, more generally, whether or not in the inner circle linked with the Guptas, has become habituated to indifference, standing by while risking the most vulnerable, and without shame over social grants, in full public view. But the ANC leadership, more generally, whether or not in the inner circle linked with the Guptas, has become habituated to indifference, standing by while risking the most vulnerable, and without shame over social grants, in full public view. But the ANC leadership, more generally, whether or not in the inner circle linked with the Guptas, has become habituated to indifference, standing by while risking the most vulnerable, and without shame over social grants, in full public view. At a purely constitutional level, Dlamini, as well as fellow Ministers Faith Muthambi, Nkosinathi Nhleko and many others, have shown that they do not abide by the constitutional obligation to be accountable to organs of state like Parliament. Instead they are accountable, whether or not it is in accordance with the Constitution, to Zuma. At a purely constitutional level, Dlamini, as well as fellow Ministers Faith Muthambi, Nkosinathi Nhleko and many others, have shown that they do not abide by the constitutional obligation to be accountable to organs of state like Parliament. Instead they are accountable, whether or not it is in accordance with the Constitution, to Zuma. At a purely constitutional level, Dlamini, as well as fellow Ministers Faith Muthambi, Nkosinathi Nhleko and many others, have shown that they do not abide by the constitutional obligation to be accountable to organs of state like Parliament. Instead they are accountable, whether or not it is in accordance with the Constitution, to Zuma. It is a mistake to simply ascribe this to cadre deployment , the fact that MPs are elected through party lists and not constituencies. The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. It is a mistake to simply ascribe this to cadre deployment , the fact that MPs are elected through party lists and not constituencies. The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. It is a mistake to simply ascribe this to cadre deployment , the fact that MPs are elected through party lists and not constituencies. It is a mistake to simply ascribe this to cadre deployment , the fact that MPs are elected through party lists and not constituencies. It is a mistake to simply ascribe this to cadre deployment , the fact that MPs are elected through party lists and not constituencies. The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty The loyalty displayed to the President is not simply an ANC loyalty ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. ; not a sense of my organisation, right or wrong . Instead, those in positions understand that the most important person to please and satisfy that one is doing what is required by whatever means necessary is the President. That relationship is the basis for rewards, including high office and wealth. Related to this is the need to secure him once he leaves office, by ensuring that the Presidency falls into safe hands hands that will protect uBaba from potential prosecution and enable him to hold on to the wealth he has acquired. For Dlamini it may well be that her ministry has not been her core business. Instead, it may well be to ensure, through the powers at her disposal as ANC Women s League President, that Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma is elected ANC president at the end of 2017. Related to this is the need to secure him once he leaves office, by ensuring that the Presidency falls into safe hands hands that will protect uBaba from potential prosecution and enable him to hold on to the wealth he has acquired. For Dlamini it may well be that her ministry has not been her core business. Instead, it may well be to ensure, through the powers at her disposal as ANC Women s League President, that Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma is elected ANC president at the end of 2017. Related to this is the need to secure him once he leaves office, by ensuring that the Presidency falls into safe hands hands that will protect uBaba from potential prosecution and enable him to hold on to the wealth he has acquired. For Dlamini it may well be that her ministry has not been her core business. Instead, it may well be to ensure, through the powers at her disposal as ANC Women s League President, that Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma is elected ANC president at the end of 2017. Yet the Concourt made an unequivocal finding on Dlamini s lack of performance of constitutional duties. The problem with taking forward that decision is that there is no higher authority with ethical leadership qualities that can be invoked to reprimand and dismiss Dlamini. Even if it were to happen, it is unlikely to be for ethical reasons or constitutional governance. How can it be when the President charged with that responsibility is without any moral authority? Yet the Concourt made an unequivocal finding on Dlamini s lack of performance of constitutional duties. The problem with taking forward that decision is that there is no higher authority with ethical leadership qualities that can be invoked to reprimand and dismiss Dlamini. Even if it were to happen, it is unlikely to be for ethical reasons or constitutional governance. How can it be when the President charged with that responsibility is without any moral authority? Yet the Concourt made an unequivocal finding on Dlamini s lack of performance of constitutional duties. The problem with taking forward that decision is that there is no higher authority with ethical leadership qualities that can be invoked to reprimand and dismiss Dlamini. Even if it were to happen, it is unlikely to be for ethical reasons or constitutional governance. How can it be when the President charged with that responsibility is without any moral authority? I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something I am not comfortable with calling on the President to exercise his judgment in order to dismiss Dlamini. Certainly, Dlamini ought to be dismissed she has failed to perform her duties but there is something repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act repugnant in appealing to Zuma to act on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. on the expectation that he will perform an ethical duty against someone who acts no differently from the way that he does. When we appeal to Zuma, which is of course our formal right as citizens of the country to appeal to the head of state, we are attributing to the bearer of that office qualities that he has repeatedly shown he does not have. In this particular instance, as with Nkandla, Zuma has again displayed a lack of seriousness about the grant crisis. He joked about how others understand democracy, in calling for dismissal of a person before the date of the delivery of grants had arisen. In other words, he did not appreciate that the very creation of a crisis in delivery of grants was a demonstration of lack of concern and responsibility regarding the needs and rights of grant recipients. Whether or not last minute relief could be sought, as appears to have been achieved by the Concourt decision, did not detract from the crisis created by the actions and inaction of ANC government officials. In this particular instance, as with Nkandla, Zuma has again displayed a lack of seriousness about the grant crisis. He joked about how others understand democracy, in calling for dismissal of a person before the date of the delivery of grants had arisen. In other words, he did not appreciate that the very creation of a crisis in delivery of grants was a demonstration of lack of concern and responsibility regarding the needs and rights of grant recipients. Whether or not last minute relief could be sought, as appears to have been achieved by the Concourt decision, did not detract from the crisis created by the actions and inaction of ANC government officials. In this particular instance, as with Nkandla, Zuma has again displayed a lack of seriousness about the grant crisis. He joked about how others understand democracy, in calling for dismissal of a person before the date of the delivery of grants had arisen. In other words, he did not appreciate that the very creation of a crisis in delivery of grants was a demonstration of lack of concern and responsibility regarding the needs and rights of grant recipients. Whether or not last minute relief could be sought, as appears to have been achieved by the Concourt decision, did not detract from the crisis created by the actions and inaction of ANC government officials. Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the de jure head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the de jure head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the Is it overly partisan to resist the idea of appealing to the de jure de jure de jure head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. head of the South African state? Personally, I think it is time that we declare Zuma unfit to hold office (as the EFF and Cope already do), but more is required. During the struggle against apartheid, those who were involved in the liberation struggle nationally and internationally declared the apartheid state to be illegitimate and in some cases, illegal. It may well be that the current state, led as it is in a manner that plays havoc with people s lives, faces a crisis of legitimacy. The government may have been voted into office as the majority party (though it may not retain that majority in the future), but it acts in a manner contrary to the interests of that majority. That makes it illegitimate, and by virtue of its control of state organs, by extension the state is illegitimate as well. During the struggle against apartheid, those who were involved in the liberation struggle nationally and internationally declared the apartheid state to be illegitimate and in some cases, illegal. It may well be that the current state, led as it is in a manner that plays havoc with people s lives, faces a crisis of legitimacy. The government may have been voted into office as the majority party (though it may not retain that majority in the future), but it acts in a manner contrary to the interests of that majority. That makes it illegitimate, and by virtue of its control of state organs, by extension the state is illegitimate as well. During the struggle against apartheid, those who were involved in the liberation struggle nationally and internationally declared the apartheid state to be illegitimate and in some cases, illegal. It may well be that the current state, led as it is in a manner that plays havoc with people s lives, faces a crisis of legitimacy. The government may have been voted into office as the majority party (though it may not retain that majority in the future), but it acts in a manner contrary to the interests of that majority. That makes it illegitimate, and by virtue of its control of state organs, by extension the state is illegitimate as well. South Africans of goodwill, South Africans who care for all who live in this country, some living in hunger and without shelter, need to unite in finding a way of resolving this impasse. We can build on the existing institutional structure to develop an ever-deepening democracy. South Africans of goodwill, South Africans who care for all who live in this country, some living in hunger and without shelter, need to unite in finding a way of resolving this impasse. We can build on the existing institutional structure to develop an ever-deepening democracy. South Africans of goodwill, South Africans who care for all who live in this country, some living in hunger and without shelter, need to unite in finding a way of resolving this impasse. We can build on the existing institutional structure to develop an ever-deepening democracy. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism is the antidote needed against the current indifference. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism is the antidote needed against the current indifference. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. We have resources that, if not diverted into personal benefit, could make a better life for many more in our country. We need to find a way of uniting to make that happen. We are not powerless insofar as much depends on what we ourselves do in our own lives. We need to recover a humanist consciousness and practice and that can be done at every level and in every sphere of our lives. We need in all our interactions to relate in a manner that demonstrates concern for the well being of every human being. The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism The opposite of good is not evil, the opposite of good is indifference , according to Abraham Heschel. Active humanism is the antidote needed against the current indifference. is the antidote needed against the current indifference. is the antidote needed against the current indifference. is the antidote needed against the current indifference. We need to reach out to one another wherever we are located and by joining together, start to recover the democracy and emancipatory promise of this land that we love. DM We need to reach out to one another wherever we are located and by joining together, start to recover the democracy and emancipatory promise of this land that we love. DM We need to reach out to one another wherever we are located and by joining together, start to recover the democracy and emancipatory promise of this land that we love. DM DM Photo of Raymond Suttner by Ivor Markman. Photo of Raymond Suttner by Ivor Markman. Photo of Raymond Suttner by Ivor Markman. Photo of Raymond Suttner by Ivor Markman. Photo of Raymond Suttner by Ivor Markman. Raymond Suttner is a scholar and political analyst. Currently he is a Part-time Professor attached to Rhodes University and an Emeritus Professor at Unisa. He served lengthy periods in prison and house arrest for underground and public anti-apartheid activities. His prison memoir Inside Apartheid s prison will be reissued with a new introduction covering his more recent life outside the ANC and will be published by Jacana Media in the first half of this year. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com and his twitter handle is @raymondsuttner Raymond Suttner is a scholar and political analyst. Currently he is a Part-time Professor attached to Rhodes University and an Emeritus Professor at Unisa. He served lengthy periods in prison and house arrest for underground and public anti-apartheid activities. His prison memoir Inside Apartheid s prison will be reissued with a new introduction covering his more recent life outside the ANC and will be published by Jacana Media in the first half of this year. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com and his twitter handle is @raymondsuttner Raymond Suttner is a scholar and political analyst. Currently he is a Part-time Professor attached to Rhodes University and an Emeritus Professor at Unisa. He served lengthy periods in prison and house arrest for underground and public anti-apartheid activities. His prison memoir Raymond Suttner is a scholar and political analyst. Currently he is a Part-time Professor attached to Rhodes University and an Emeritus Professor at Unisa. He served lengthy periods in prison and house arrest for underground and public anti-apartheid activities. His prison memoir Raymond Suttner is a scholar and political analyst. Currently he is a Part-time Professor attached to Rhodes University and an Emeritus Professor at Unisa. He served lengthy periods in prison and house arrest for underground and public anti-apartheid activities. His prison memoir Inside Apartheid s prison Inside Apartheid s prison Inside Apartheid s prison Inside Apartheid s prison will be reissued with a new introduction covering his more recent life outside the ANC and will be published will be reissued with a new introduction covering his more recent life outside the ANC and will be published will be reissued with a new introduction covering his more recent life outside the ANC and will be published by Jacana Media in the first half of this year. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com and his twitter handle is @raymondsuttner by Jacana Media in the first half of this year. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com and his twitter handle is @raymondsuttner by Jacana Media in the first half of this year. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com and his twitter handle is @raymondsuttner Professor Raymond Suttner, attached to Rhodes University and UNISA, is an analyst on current political questions and leadership issues. He writes a regular column and is interviewed weekly on Creamer Media s Polity.org.za. Suttner is a former political prisoner and was in the leadership of the ANC-led alliance in the 1990s. He blogs at raymondsuttner.com raymondsuttner.com raymondsuttner.com .