While we cannot ask and answer all these questions here, we attempt to explore some troubling areas that go to the heart of the gap between how a particular application of restorative justice is conceptualised, contextualised, practised and experienced. While we cannot ask and answer all these questions here, we attempt to explore some troubling areas that go to the heart of the gap between how a particular application of restorative justice is conceptualised, contextualised, practised and experienced. While we cannot ask and answer all these questions here, we attempt to explore some troubling areas that go to the heart of the gap between how a particular application of restorative justice is conceptualised, contextualised, practised and experienced. Our own interventions via letters to the media encourage alumni to support the process agreed to by students and UCT s executive, precisely because we have individually and vicariously encountered many of the issues raised by students during our time there. These wicked issues persist throughout this society. This is an opportunity for students, staff and the university (any university for that matter) to address these deep-seated conflicts innovatively. Our own interventions via letters to the media encourage alumni to support the process agreed to by students and UCT s executive, precisely because we have individually and vicariously encountered many of the issues raised by students during our time there. These wicked issues persist throughout this society. This is an opportunity for students, staff and the university (any university for that matter) to address these deep-seated conflicts innovatively. Our own interventions via letters to the media encourage alumni to support the process agreed to by students and UCT s executive, precisely because we have individually and vicariously encountered many of the issues raised by students during our time there. These wicked issues persist throughout this society. This is an opportunity for students, staff and the university (any university for that matter) to address these deep-seated conflicts innovatively. As our contribution to this discussion, we limit this article to two related questions in an attempt to lay bare our assumptions and considered belief that an expansive (trans-historical), rather than a modest (individualised) application of restorative justice is appropriate for our alma mater, and for these times. As our contribution to this discussion, we limit this article to two related questions in an attempt to lay bare our assumptions and considered belief that an expansive (trans-historical), rather than a modest (individualised) application of restorative justice is appropriate for our alma mater, and for these times. As our contribution to this discussion, we limit this article to two related questions in an attempt to lay bare our assumptions and considered belief that an expansive (trans-historical), rather than a modest (individualised) application of restorative justice is appropriate for our alma mater, and for these times. These questions are important for the following reasons: These questions are important for the following reasons: These questions are important for the following reasons: We therefore argue that anything less than a trans-historical approach is bound to entrench divisions; escalate tensions; contribute to wastage of scarce resources, and will not move the institution or society forward. We therefore argue that anything less than a trans-historical approach is bound to entrench divisions; escalate tensions; contribute to wastage of scarce resources, and will not move the institution or society forward. We therefore argue that anything less than a trans-historical approach is bound to entrench divisions; escalate tensions; contribute to wastage of scarce resources, and will not move the institution or society forward. Our support for this brave process (and deliberately not for sides ) is based on a clear vision of a humane society. We trust our alma mater, challenged and supported by its visionary students, staff and alumni, to innovate and make a decisive break with the past for the common good. DM Our support for this brave process (and deliberately not for sides ) is based on a clear vision of a humane society. We trust our alma mater, challenged and supported by its visionary students, staff and alumni, to innovate and make a decisive break with the past for the common good. DM Our support for this brave process (and deliberately not for sides ) is based on a clear vision of a humane society. We trust our alma mater, challenged and supported by its visionary students, staff and alumni, to innovate and make a decisive break with the past for the common good. DM DM Photo of UCT by Flowcomm via Flickr Photo of UCT by Flowcomm via Flickr Photo of UCT by Flowcomm via Flickr Signed: Signed: Signed: