 On Saturday morning, I got a call from my colleague asking if I had taken my laptop with me, Calata told the Daily Maverick. He had not. Then she told me that her laptop isn t there either, and neither are other colleagues , and she suspects they were stolen. Calata has not returned to the office since, as he has been working from Johannesburg, but has spoken to his other colleagues to verify that other laptops were indeed taken from the office. No other electronic equipment was targeted. The burglary at the SABC s offices makes a mockery of the increasingly draconian security measures introduced by Parliament over recent years. No signs were found of forced entry at the offices, which are in a building which is supposed to be guarded by police. The Right2Know campaign has termed the break-in an attack on the public broadcaster and on Parliament itself . The lobby group expressed concern that the apparent target was journalists laptops, suggesting that those behind the crime were after sensitive or personal information that is on the journalists computers . Right2Know also noted that the break-in took place in a context where there is a broader pattern of harassment and targeting of SABC workers . Calata was one of the so-called SABC 8: journalists initially fired by the public broadcaster last year after protesting against its policy of not broadcasting footage of violent protests. After a legal challenge they were subsequently reinstated. Members of the SABC 8 including Calata appeared before Parliament to blow the whistle on conditions at the SABC and received threats for doing so. An SMS sent to four of the SABC 8 the day after their parliamentary testimony, and seen by the Daily Maverick, read: TRAITORS. PROTETING UR WHITE FRIENDS IN PARLMENT WHO STARTED THIS. TELLING LIES ABT UR CDES. U WERE WARN. WE DON T KILL BLACKS. BUT SIT AND WATCH THE BLOOD FLOW. Who or what is behind this intimidation? It s impossible to say for sure, but we ve seen a pattern of unexplained break-ins targeting those who seem to be critical of government and the Zuma faction, R2K communicator Busi Mtabane told the Daily Maverick. One possibility is that it might be linked to the current ongoing battle between certain politicians [and] Hlaudi Motsoeneng and his cabal who are hellbent on hijacking the SABC. The Democratic Alliance, meanwhile, fingered the State Security Agency in its response to the break-in. Given a history in seizing laptops, and involvement in campaigns to intimidate journalists as was revealed during the SABC inquiry the DA will request that the Inspector-General of Intelligence, Dr Sethlomamaru Dintwe, investigate the State Security Agency s possible involvement in this latest break-in, said DA shadow minister of communications Phumzile van Damme. In referring to the SSA s history , Van Damme was referencing previous allegations made by the SABC 8 that the SSA had tapped their phones. In order for the SSA to legally intercept telecommunications, it requires permission from the so-called Rica judge , Judge Yvonne Mokgoro, to do so after submitting evidence that the interception is essential to prevent criminal or terrorist activities. Last month, Judge Mokgoro told the DA that she had not authorised the SSA to tap any phones belonging to SABC employees. The Inspector-General of Intelligence has said that he will investigate. The notion that the SSA is overreaching its mandate is one that appears to be supported by Deputy Minister of Public Works Jeremy Cronin SSA is overreaching its mandate is one that appears to be supported by Deputy Minister of Public Works Jeremy Cronin Dangor, who was director general of Social Development before resigning in protest at the handling of the social grants crisis, saw his house targeted in a suspicious burglary after his resignation. The Sunday Times subsequently reported that Dangor had also received threatening phonecalls and texts Dangor had also received threatening phonecalls and texts . The threats stopped after the Sunday Times article, Dangor told the Daily Maverick on Tuesday. Aside from the break-in and home invasion, the warning of continuous threats came in the form of credible alerts from people in the intelligence community. Intimidation and threats are now extending to the highest levels of the ANC s National Executive Committee. Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu confirmed to City Press last weekend that she had received death threats she had received death threats The Mail &amp; Guardian had subsequently reported that Sisulu had escaped two assassination attempts Sisulu had escaped two assassination attempts his name was on the same list as Sisulu s. This is all playing out against a backdrop of very real political assassinations in KwaZulu-Natal, where a spate of political killings apparently sparked by the local government elections last August has continued unabated. According to City Press, the murders of at least 12 councillors, municipal officials and civic activists the murders of at least 12 councillors, municipal officials and civic activists have happened since the establishment of a commission of inquiry in October. As R2K notes, it is impossible to say with certainty which forces are behind this culture of intimidation, though the role of the SSA seems increasingly problematic. One thing is certain, though: to be a dissenting voice in the South African public space requires ever more bravery. DM DM Rod Waddington via Flickr. &nbsp;