In 2015 Mira Dutschke and I released our film The High Cost of Cheap Gas The High Cost of Cheap Gas published in the UK Guardian Companies had been hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, in protected areas like the Central Kalahari Game Reserve for years, exploring for good gas returns from Botswana s coal layers. It was denied by the government at the time. We had on-the-ground interviews, photographs from the companies' own websites companies' own websites here as reported in Mining Weekly Apparently Botswana has stopped fracking for natural gas (if it was ever officially allowed) after our follow-up story our follow-up story This sent companies like Botswana-based DeWet Drilling to more unregulated places like Mozambique, where they have recently been drilling as many as 76 gas wells for Sasol on-shore near Inhassoro, which their workers say will be fracked by French oil services company Schlumberger. According to our team s research, today there is only one current working operation in Botswana producing gas from the original drilling plan. Outlined in their own corporate report from 2015 Outlined in their own corporate report from 2015 Their 2013 repo we overlaid it At the US Government Survey, they map exact earthquake locations worldwide with precision. According to their latest calculation According to their latest calculation David W Eaton is a professor of geophysics at the University of Calgary and co-author of a December 2016 paper in the journal Science. His findings His findings Those findings according to CNN So did fracking in Botswana cause Johannesburg to tremble? This is not actually possible to say scientifically without more information about what Tlou is doing in the central Kalahari. Are they still fracking? Are they injecting their waste water into deep injection wells? One thing is certain; to produce gas from coal seams you need to pump out a lot of water that they sit in to let the gas desorb just like releasing the pressure in a can of soda allows the carbon dioxide to bubble out. This produced water is usually pumped back into the ground, somewhere nearby and very deep down. When you do this, studies have shown studies have shown that basal pressure underground changes, and the potential consequences of that? Earthquakes. DM DM Jeffrey Barbee is the director and founder of AllianceEarth.org , an independent not-for-profit environmental and scientific reporting initiative investigating stories for the world s media. Follow him on:@jeffreybarbee and @allianceearth Photo: A US Government Survey map indicates that the location for the tremor which shook much of the subregion this week was underneath the gas well drill sites where Tlou has been operating for at least the last five years.