Ramaphosa talks land, Israel and unity, DM reflects on the conference, and North Korean soldier defects.  1 Thursday, 21 December 2017   “Don't be so humble, you're not that great.” Golda Meir  3  STORY OF THE DAY   #ANCdecides2017: New NEC split down the middle   By GREG NICOLSON   Election results for the ANC’s additional 80 members of the national executive committee (NEC) were finally released in the early hours of Thursday morning. With the allegiances of the top six officials split, the NEC will be crucial moving forward. But the results point to a stalemate, with the two different factions taking a similar number of positions.   2 WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Cyril Ramapoised for land expropriation   Ramaphosa's first speech as the ANC president and the conference's last was full of messages of unity and togetherness. Dripping with a collective spirit, you would be forgiven for thinking that the NEC and top six was not wholly riven with as many rogues as they were not. But a crucial point in his speech focused heavily on land expropriation without compensation. Ramaphosa did stress that this would be done in a way so as not to hurt the economy, however. One presumes this did not include the micro-economic well being of whomever's land it currently is.  3 Key moments of the conference   The conference appeared to be characterised much the same as soldiers describe war: long periods of utter boredom punctuated by moments of complete adrenalin-pumping excitement. Before Daily Maverick's correspondents passed out - just minutes ago it should be said - they compiled a key list of takeaway points you should read. If you hadn't followed the conference carefully, these are your crib notes for 2018.   Germany arrests ram-attack plotter   German authorities have announced the arrest on Wednesday of a man accused of planning a ramming-style attack. The German national had scouted out a location in Karlsruhe after pledging allegiance to Islamic State. The suspect had travelled to Iraq twice to receive training in preparation for the attack.   Second DMZ defection to South Korea   Another North Korean soldier has defected to the south overnight. The "low-ranking" individual crossed at a foggy point in the Demilitarised Zone. Initially, North Korean soldiers scrambled to try to find him, presumably to attempt to shoot the man before he crossed. A warning burst from a South Korean machine gun, however, soon discouraged any thoughts of pursuit.   IN NUMBERS   1,200   The number of Cuban cigars ordered by JFK the day before the US placed a trade embargo on Cuba.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1965 Louis Washkansky, the first heart transplant patient to survive, dies 18 days after his surgery.   Dogs learn how to control the strength of their bites as puppies. This is because biting too hard interrupts playtime.    FEATURED ARTICLES   #ANCdecides2017: A new day dawns as Ramaphosa gives first address as ANC President   BY REBECCA DAVIS   #ANCdecides2017: Land expropriation without compensation makes grand entrance   BY MARIANNE MERTEN   #ANCdecides2017: Five days, nine memorable moments   BY REBECCA DAVIS & GREG NICOLSON   Op-Ed: ‘We must act fearlessly against alleged corruption and abuse of office within our ranks’   BY CYRIL RAMAPHOSA   #ANCdecides2017: Reporter’s notebook – End of Days   BY STEPHEN GROOTES   #ANCdecides2017 Reflections: Fear and loathing in the Nasrec media pen   BY NKATEKO MABASA   SassaGate: Dlamini costs affidavit inadvertently sets out chaos under her leadership   BY MARIANNE THAMM   Explainer: The DA vs De Lille, and her fight-back plans to remain mayor of Cape Town   BY MARELISE VAN DER MERWE   US: Donald Trump’s Yuge, Bigly first year as President. It was gonna be amazing, folks. It wasn’t.   BY J BROOKS SPECTOR   OPINIONISTAS   #ANCDecides2017: The conference is like a Test match   A column by ANTOINETTE MULLER   Zimbabwe’s Quest for Legitimacy   A column by SHOWERS MAWOWA   WeatherBFN: min: 17° max 30°, cloudyCPT: min: 16° max: 27°,  sunnyDBN: min: 12° max: 27°, cloudyEL: min: 20° max: 28°, cloudyJHB: min: 16° max: 26°, rainyKIM: min: 18° max: 31°, rainyMHK: min: 18° max: 30°, cloudyPMB: min: 19° max: 31°, cloudyPE: min: 18° max: 30°, cloudyPTA: min: 19° max: 29°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$64.54Gold=$1,265.26Platinum=$919.33R/$=12.73R/€=15.13R/£=17.05BTC/$=16,749JSE All Share=58,032.09DJIA=24,740.74FTSE 100=7,525.22   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          