Net neutrality rolled back, school bus crash in France kills 4, and Airbus lands massive order with Delta.   TGIF, 15 December 2017   “Look... to go through life and call it yours - your life - you first have to get your own pain. Pain that's unique to you. You can't just dip into the common bin and say 'That's enough!'...” Peter Shaffer   STORY OF THE DAY   TRAINSPOTTER: About time – the ANC’s fight to the death is finally upon us   By RICHARD POPLAK   One hundred and six years of history have nudged the African National Congress towards this moment, their very own Battle of Helm’s Deep, where all of the organisation’s internal contradictions – to say nothing of the terrible legacy of South Africa itself – will play out over the course of five long days (if we’re lucky). South Africans have been in the midst of this war for so long that perspective is nearly impossible – the ruckus has stolen our brains. At the core of this melee is the Congress’s failure to construct a cohesive, comprehensive nation out of the ruins of apartheid. And in the middle of the molten jumble, we find Jacob Zuma, post-apartheid South Africa’s emblematic figure. (You thought that was Nelson Mandela? Nah.) What happens to Zuma and his faction this weekend determines not just the future of the party, but of the country.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Net Neutrality dies a slow, lobby-infested death   A proposal by Republican Ajit Pai to roll back Obama-era restrictions on what ISPs can do to the internet in America has been passed. With net neutrality now dead on the floor, ISPs have zero incentive not to throttle, degrade, paywall or generally screw with their consumers. Pai published perhaps the single-most condescending video in reaction to the rollback, showing if anything that American liberties seem to be dying not with a bang, but with a disappointing, turpid whimper.   Train collision with school bus in France killed four   Four children have been killed and 20 injured in a tragic accident in southern France. A train collided with the rear of a school bus in Milas, near the Spanish border. Severed in two, 95 rescue workers rush to the bus' wreckage. Both bus and train driver are being questioned, tested for alcohol and drugs, and an investigation was launched immediately.   Similar solar system discovered by AI   An artificial intelligence has discovered a solar system with as many planets as our own. NASA's Kepler telescope and the AI uncovered the eight planet system orbiting a star named Kepler 90, 2,545 light years away. It is not expected that any of the planets would be habitable.   Delta makes massive Airbus order   Delta Airlines has ordered 100 Airbus A321neo aircraft in a deal worth over $12 billion. The order for the new aircraft, to be delivered from 2020-2023, looks set to ruin rival Boeing's day. Boeing had previously launched a trade dispute with Delta, quite possibly souring the aerospace milk in the process.   IN NUMBERS   1   The number of submarines sunk while submerged by another submarine.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today is International Tea Day. Unless you live in Boston.   Wild rats still enjoying running wheels.   FEATURED ARTICLES   Declassified: Apartheid Profits – A President, a Billionaire and The Bounty Hunters   BY OPEN SECRETS   #ANCdecides2017: Lindiwe Sisulu and David Mabuza to face off for No 2 position   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   ANC Leadership Race: Cliffhanger as Free State branch delegate judgment due on Friday   BY GREG NICOLSON   Op-Ed: Choose life – or the ANC shall surely perish   BY BISHOP MALUSI MPUMLWANA   State Capture: Helen Suzman Foundation and Magda Wierzycka sue President Zuma and 74 others   BY MARIANNE THAMM   #ANCdecides2017: The Great Chakalaka Conundrum   BY J BROOKS SPECTOR   ANC Leadership Race: What happens if Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma wins?   BY STEPHEN GROOTES   ANC Leadership Race: Delegates ready and eager for ‘cleansing’ conference   BY PUSELETSO NTHATE   Right of Reply: I stand for restoring the dignity of the ANC – Sisulu   BY LINDIWE SISULU   OPINIONISTAS   Business must participate in national renewal   A column by BONANG MOHALE   To end a dictatorship of the minority, we need ‘One ANC Member, One Vote’   A column by OMRY MAKGOALE   View From Afar: South Africa teeters on the brink   A column by SAUL MUSKER   Goodbye 2017: The Other News Awards   A column by MARELISE VAN DER MERWE   WeatherBFN: min: 14° max 32°, cloudyCPT: min: 15° max: 26°,  sunnyDBN: min: 17° max: 22°, cloudyEL: min: 17° max: 24°, cloudyJHB: min: 12° max: 24°, cloudyKIM: min: 19° max: 34°, cloudyMHK: min: 17° max: 31°, sunnyPMB: min: 14° max: 24°, cloudyPE: min: 12° max: 28°, cloudyPTA: min: 14° max: 28°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$62.79Gold=$1,254.16Platinum=$881.50R/$=13.48R/€=15.88R/£=18.11BTC/$=16,849JSE All Share=57,845.57DJIA=24,576.01FTSE 100=7,448.12   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          