SG position threatens entire conference, US tax reform to be rammed through, and Saudi king targeted in Houthi attack.   Wednesday, 20 December 2017   “You at this time can only be destroyed by yourselves, from within and not from without. You have reached the point where the victory is to be won from within and can only be lost from within.” Marcus Garvey   STORY OF THE DAY   TRAINSPOTTER: How the ANC managed to birth the Ramabuza monstrosity   By RICHARD POPLAK   As it arrived at the 54th National Electoral Conference in Nasrec, Gauteng, the ANC was speeding not towards a crossroads, but straight at a T-junction. On the right was a candidate and a slate with a level of competence who, to some greater or lesser extent, would have ended the Zuma era and returned the country to a version of credibility. On the left, a continuation and a deepening of the gangster state, with the same old don and some new players. Instead of picking a direction, the ANC careened into the stop sign and exploded on impact.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   NEC votes counted while ANC spins   The final day of the ANC elective conference will begin in a flurry of vote queries, media harassment, and general pandemonium. What started as a comedy of delays has devolved into a tragedy of missed voters, questionable results and very little time to sort any of it out before the conference ends. And end it must, followed swiftly thereafter by a potential flood of legal action to challenge the top six positions.   Republicans seek to ram through tax bill   After it was passed in the House of Representatives, Republicans are looking to force President Donald Trump's new tax bill through the Senate today. The bill's latest incarnation was shown just one week ago, allowing little time for meaningful analysis. Initial expectations are that the measures proposed would add $1.5-trillion to the United States' debt, and personally benefit Trump. The Empire, it seems, is striking back. Fast.   Mexico bus crash kills 11 people   A bus carrying tourists from a cruise ship has run off the road in Mexico, killing 11. The bus had been travelling along the Mexican Caribbean coast and had accidentally driven off a straight stretch of road. Another 20 tourists were also injured in the accident. Tour operators involved have not yet explained why the bus had veered off the road.   Saudi Arabia intercepted Houthi missile   Saudi authorities have stated that they intercepted a missile launched by Iran-backed Houthi rebels. Officials claimed the missile had been aimed directly at Saudi King Salman's residence. The US ambassador to the UN, Nikki Haley took a break from vetoing a resolution cancelling Jerusalem as capital of Israel to threaten Iran with action in retaliation.    IN NUMBERS   1   The average number of tourists who die per week on vacation in Hawaii.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1995 Nato begins peacekeeping operations in Bosnia.   Ed Sheeran considers Eminem one of his greatest musical inspirations.   FEATURED ARTICLES   #ANCdecides2017: Stalemate in the fight over secretary-general election could put the entire conference under threat   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   #ANCdecides2017: Reporter’s notebook – A party that can’t fix its own election can’t fix a national one either (surely?)   BY STEPHEN GROOTES   #ANCdecides2017 Analysis: Women’s League does no favour to serious problems in ANC gender agenda   BY REBECCA DAVIS   Jacques Pauw: SARS’ court application against writer ‘conceded the truth’ – NB Publishers   BY NEWS24   #ANCdecides2017 Analysis: Media isolation a symbol of ANC paranoia   BY GREG NICOLSON   #ANCdecides2017 in Pictures: Four days of drama, shock results and much waiting   BY DAILY MAVERICK   #ANCDecides2017: 'Missing' votes could tip SG position in favour of Mchunu   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   Op-Ed: Cape Town’s bid to lock down the water crisis   BY GINA ZIERVOGEL   OPINIONISTAS   Veni, vidi, vici – ‘Tis the season to be jolly   A column by OSCAR VAN HEERDEN   How the new ANC leadership can 'recall' Zuma as president of South Africa   A column by PIERRE DE VOS   Ramaphosa’s mettle and political skill will be severely tested over next 18 months   A column by MZUKISI QOBO   Polar Bears: How a video can tell a lie   A column by IVO VEGTER   Cyril Ramaphosa, the Great Negotiator, has his work cut out for him to stop the rot   A column by JUDITH FEBRUARY   WeatherBFN: min: 17° max 32°, cloudyCPT: min: 15° max: 28°,  sunnyDBN: min: 16° max: 22°, cloudyEL: min: 16° max: 26°, cloudyJHB: min: 16° max: 26°, rainyKIM: min: 21° max: 35°, cloudyMHK: min: 19° max: 30°, sunnyPMB: min: 15° max: 26°, cloudyPE: min: 14° max: 29°, cloudyPTA: min: 14° max: 26°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$63.77Gold=$1,261.76Platinum=$914.65R/$=12.71R/€=15.05R/£=17.01BTC/$=18,004JSE All Share=58,170.44DJIA=24,750.68FTSE 100=7,544.09   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          