School shooting kills two in New Mexico, Senator Franken quits over allegations, and Bitcoin's rise continues unabated.   TGIF, 8 December 2017   “Three o'clock is always too late or too early for anything you want to do.” Jean-Paul Sartre   STORY OF THE DAY   Scorpio: The Makwakwa Dossier, Part 3 – Why SARS No 2’s erratic spending pattern raised red flags with Financial Intelligence   By PAULI VAN WYK for SCORPIO   Jonas Makwakwa – in charge of SARS’ key revenue generating units – seemingly struggles to manage his own finances. We know this because Scorpio has seen the financial statements of Makwakwa’s primary bank account for the years 2014 to 2016. His expenses often outweighed his income – in three months Makwakwa spent about three times more than the salary he gets from SARS, our analysis of his financials show. Reporting a series of suspicious deposits into this account in 2017, the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) found that Makwakwa had grown a dependency on possibly illegal payments to maintain his lifestyle. In Part Three, Scorpio reveals that the FIC had good reason to be worried.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Two killed in school shooting   A gunman in New Mexico has been killed after a shooting spree at a high school. The shooting occurred at Aztec High School, with police withholding the attacker's identity for now. Coming just a day after Republicans rammed through relaxed concealed gun control measures, the local community, at least, will have some questions.   Bitcoin's meteoric rise continues   If someone had told you on Monday Bitcoin would be smashing past $17,000 with no signs of slowing down, you would have told them to check the meds. And yet, the cryptocurrency has continued its rise, showing ridiculous growth even by its own standards. As much as the traditional investor community considers it a bubble, they appear to be propping up its ongoing rise by buying up BTC as much as possible.   Al Franken quits Senate   US Senator Al Franken announced on Thursday that he would be resigning. Franken has been accused of multiple accounts of sexual misconduct. The Democrat insisted he was a "champion" of women. On his way out Franken made a parting shot at Trump, saying: "I, of all people, am aware that there is some irony in the fact I am leaving while a man who bragged on tape about his history of the sexual assault sits in the Oval Office."   GE announces major job cuts   Industrial heavyweight General Electric will be shedding 12,000 jobs in its power unit. The announcement was part of a turnaround plan for the US, with the majority of the job cuts affecting its non-American staff. European labour union representatives are furious, calling the decision a short-term money grab by GE's shareholders.   IN NUMBERS   $25,000   The figure William Shatner sold his kidney stone for. He used the money to fund a house construction by Habitat for Humanity.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1941 US President Franklin D Roosevelt declares war on Japan following the Pearl Harbour attack. His "day of infamy" speech still reverberates today.   A charity-run experiment showed that people were more likely to donate to a sick dog than a sick child.    FEATURED ARTICLES   Paul O’Sullivan vs The State: Forensic investigator demands R199-million for unlawful arrest   BY MARIANNE THAMM   Op-Ed: The Glebelands killing fields: Dead – 100, Convicted – 1. And no end in sight for hostel violence   BY VANESSA BURGER   Life Esidimeni: Dr Selebano and the system of death   BY GREG NICOLSON   Op-Ed: A personal glimpse at how MultiChoice cuts, amends and abandons deals   BY ANDRÉ-PIERRE DU PLESSIS   The Gathering (Video, Session 6): Andrew Feinstein unravels the web of global corruption   BY DAILY MAVERICK   Op-Ed: Recognition of Jerusalem by the US is reckless and must be sanctioned   BY SHENILLA MOHAMED   ‘SA should not withdraw from ICC, needs to project itself as a leader in anti-impunity efforts’ – NGOs   BY PETER FABRICIUS   US: 12/06/2017 – The day Jerusalem gained a US embassy, and Donald Trump threw away US leverage   BY J BROOKS SPECTOR   Op-Ed: Zimbabwe offers South Africa a lesson on change and outcomes   BY DAVID REIERSGORD   Magnificent Sevens: Seven talking points before the Cape Town Sevens   BY ANTOINETTE MULLER   OPINIONISTAS   Why I believe Nomvula Mokonyane   A column by SIYA KHUMALO   The Other News Round-Up: Can we have a word?   A column by MARELISE VAN DER MERWE   Know your rights – use the law to save a life   A column by MEOKGO MATUBA   WeatherBFN: min: 14° max 28°, rainyCPT: min: 16° max: 28°,  sunnyDBN: min: 17° max: 24°, cloudyEL: min: 16° max: 28°, cloudyJHB: min: 10° max: 21°, rainyKIM: min: 17° max: 31°, cloudyMHK: min: 14° max: 26°, rainyPMB: min: 13° max: 26°, cloudyPE: min: 16° max: 31°, cloudyPTA: min: 12° max: 24°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$62.11Gold=$1,245.35Platinum=$893.68R/$=13.73R/€=16.17R/£=18.48BTC/$=17,301JSE All Share=58,013.18DJIA=24,195.73FTSE 100=7,320.75   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          