Selfish nation Rape nation Khwezi nation Raped nation Racist nation Bad to be poor nation Oppressed if you re black nation Happy if you re white nation Selfish nation Rape nation Khwezi nation Raped nation Racist nation Bad to be poor nation Oppressed if you re black nation Happy if you re white nation Nyaope nation Dying without dignity nation Dead in your hospital bed nation Drowning in a toilet nation Swimming in the sushi nation Blue-light nation No light nation Murder in the night nation Security nation Psychiatric death nation Safer in the suburbs nation Nyaope nation Dying without dignity nation Dead in your hospital bed nation Drowning in a toilet nation Swimming in the sushi nation Blue-light nation No light nation Murder in the night nation Security nation Psychiatric death nation Safer in the suburbs nation TB nation Tender but not tender nation Desperately despairing nation 600 HIV infections a day nation Hungry nation Homeless nation Dog-eat-dog nation Fuck the poor nation Lucky if you re rich nation TB nation Tender but not tender nation Desperately despairing nation 600 HIV infections a day nation Hungry nation Homeless nation Dog-eat-dog nation Fuck the poor nation Lucky if you re rich nation Corrupt nation Zuma nation Gupta nation Rupert nation Sold to the highest bidder nation Not your nation Lying politician nation Shame nation Shame on you nation No more rainbow nation nation Their state of the nation nation Corrupt nation Zuma nation Gupta nation Rupert nation Sold to the highest bidder nation Not your nation Lying politician nation Shame nation Shame on you nation No more rainbow nation nation Their state of the nation nation Death on the road nation Return to apartheid education nation Angry nation Death on the road nation Return to apartheid education nation Angry nation Annihilated youth nation Denied a basic education nation Death by the toilet nation Dearth of ideas nation Better ANC than dead nation Annihilated youth nation Denied a basic education nation Death by the toilet nation Dearth of ideas nation Better ANC than dead nation Your nation My nation Silent to be sad nation Does anybody care anyway nation Screaming nation Strangled at birth nation No more Mandela nation Whose nation Not my nation Why nation? Why Nation? What have we done nation? Your nation My nation Silent to be sad nation Does anybody care anyway nation Screaming nation Strangled at birth nation No more Mandela nation Whose nation Not my nation Why nation? Why Nation? What have we done nation? Possible nation Promise nation If only there was Ubuntu nation Resilient and resisting nation Not too late to hope nation Time to resist nation Waiting to be born nation Possible nation Promise nation If only there was Ubuntu nation Resilient and resisting nation Not too late to hope nation Time to resist nation Waiting to be born nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation Your nation? My nation? Not the nation we want for our children nation? Time to rescue the captured nation? Then get off your arse and fight for it nation Your nation? My nation? Not the nation we want for our children nation? Time to rescue the captured nation? Then get off your arse and fight for it nation DM DM DM