While SARS has declined to comment on a notice to suspend Moodley handed to him earlier this month, the departure of this senior member of the revenue service will most certainly erode years of institutional memory with regard to several crucial investigations into major and minor players in the tobacco industry and running into billions of rand. While SARS has declined to comment on a notice to suspend Moodley handed to him earlier this month, the departure of this senior member of the revenue service will most certainly erode years of institutional memory with regard to several crucial investigations into major and minor players in the tobacco industry and running into billions of rand. While SARS has declined to comment on a notice to suspend Moodley handed to him earlier this month, the departure of this senior member of the revenue service will most certainly erode years of institutional memory with regard to several crucial investigations into major and minor players in the tobacco industry and running into billions of rand. Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick has reliably learned that Moodley was notified of his impending suspension after SARS had approached the Hawks to obtain an affidavit (which has been seen by has reliably learned that Moodley was notified of his impending suspension after SARS had approached the Hawks to obtain an affidavit (which has been seen by has reliably learned that Moodley was notified of his impending suspension after SARS had approached the Hawks to obtain an affidavit (which has been seen by has reliably learned that Moodley was notified of his impending suspension after SARS had approached the Hawks to obtain an affidavit (which has been seen by Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick ) from a Johannesburg businessman. The affidavit was lodged in Bedforview on December 8, 2016 and relates to the importation of components for a tobacco manufacturing machine from Swaziland and the alleged placing of a tracking device on a vehicle transporting the equipment to South Africa. ) from a Johannesburg businessman. The affidavit was lodged in Bedforview on December 8, 2016 and relates to the importation of components for a tobacco manufacturing machine from Swaziland and the alleged placing of a tracking device on a vehicle transporting the equipment to South Africa. ) from a Johannesburg businessman. The affidavit was lodged in Bedforview on December 8, 2016 and relates to the importation of components for a tobacco manufacturing machine from Swaziland and the alleged placing of a tracking device on a vehicle transporting the equipment to South Africa. ) from a Johannesburg businessman. The affidavit was lodged in Bedforview on December 8, 2016 and relates to the importation of components for a tobacco manufacturing machine from Swaziland and the alleged placing of a tracking device on a vehicle transporting the equipment to South Africa. The businessman, The businessman, The businessman, The businessman, Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick has learned, was implicated in 2013 for his role in alleged money laundering and had made confessions to the Tactical Intervention Unit (TIU) and the High Risk Investigative Unit (HRIU) at the time. has learned, was implicated in 2013 for his role in alleged money laundering and had made confessions to the Tactical Intervention Unit (TIU) and the High Risk Investigative Unit (HRIU) at the time. has learned, was implicated in 2013 for his role in alleged money laundering and had made confessions to the Tactical Intervention Unit (TIU) and the High Risk Investigative Unit (HRIU) at the time. has learned, was implicated in 2013 for his role in alleged money laundering and had made confessions to the Tactical Intervention Unit (TIU) and the High Risk Investigative Unit (HRIU) at the time. He acted, according to his affidavit, as a consultant in the deal. He acted, according to his affidavit, as a consultant in the deal. He acted, according to his affidavit, as a consultant in the deal. Curiously, Moodley s name does not feature at all in the affidavit and it is unclear why he has suddenly been suspended. Curiously, Moodley s name does not feature at all in the affidavit and it is unclear why he has suddenly been suspended. Curiously, Moodley s name does not feature at all in the affidavit and it is unclear why he has suddenly been suspended. SARS spokesperson Sandile Memela told SARS spokesperson Sandile Memela told SARS spokesperson Sandile Memela told SARS spokesperson Sandile Memela told Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick that HR policies and practices prohibited the discussion of internal processes and employee information in the public domain . Moodley, in turn, referred that HR policies and practices prohibited the discussion of internal processes and employee information in the public domain . Moodley, in turn, referred that HR policies and practices prohibited the discussion of internal processes and employee information in the public domain . Moodley, in turn, referred that HR policies and practices prohibited the discussion of internal processes and employee information in the public domain . Moodley, in turn, referred Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick Daily Maverick s q s q s q s q s q ueries to SARS media. ueries to SARS media. ueries to SARS media. ueries to SARS media. The TIU played a The TIU played a The TIU played a The TIU played a significant role in a number of high-profile cases including: significant role in a number of high-profile cases including: significant role in a number of high-profile cases including: The TIU was part of Johann van Loggerenberg and Gene Ravele s portfolio at SARS. Van Loggerenberg managed five units of which TIU was one. It previously formed part of the Customs Border Control Unit. The TIU worked closely with other units in SARS including National Projects and the High Risk Investigation Unit (HRIU) which has been dubbed the rogue unit . The TIU was part of Johann van Loggerenberg and Gene Ravele s portfolio at SARS. Van Loggerenberg managed five units of which TIU was one. It previously formed part of the Customs Border Control Unit. The TIU worked closely with other units in SARS including National Projects and the High Risk Investigation Unit (HRIU) which has been dubbed the rogue unit . The TIU was part of Johann van Loggerenberg and Gene Ravele s portfolio at SARS. Van Loggerenberg managed five units of which TIU was one. It previously formed part of the Customs Border Control Unit. The TIU worked closely with other units in SARS including National Projects and the High Risk Investigation Unit (HRIU) which has been dubbed the rogue unit . After the purging of SARS in 2015 the Honey Badger project limped along with Moodley as the head of the TIU. He wa After the purging of SARS in 2015 the Honey Badger project limped along with Moodley as the head of the TIU. He wa After the purging of SARS in 2015 the Honey Badger project limped along with Moodley as the head of the TIU. He wa s, effectively, the last man standing. His removal now places in jeopardy the cases against ATM, UATM, Carnilinx, Ayabatwa, Benson & Craig (the Botswana-based tobacco company part owned by apartheid killer Craig Williamson) and others involving millions of rand. s, effectively, the last man standing. His removal now places in jeopardy the cases against ATM, UATM, Carnilinx, Ayabatwa, Benson & Craig (the Botswana-based tobacco company part owned by apartheid killer Craig Williamson) and others involving millions of rand. s, effectively, the last man standing. His removal now places in jeopardy the cases against ATM, UATM, Carnilinx, Ayabatwa, Benson & Craig (the Botswana-based tobacco company part owned by apartheid killer Craig Williamson) and others involving millions of rand. s, effectively, the last man standing. His removal now places in jeopardy the cases against ATM, UATM, Carnilinx, Ayabatwa, Benson & Craig (the Botswana-based tobacco company part owned by apartheid killer Craig Williamson) and others involving millions of rand. In In In In November 2013 November 2013 November 2013 November 2013 November 2013 November 2013 November 2013 then SARS acting Commissioner Ivan Pillay notified tobacco companies that SARS was investigating their tax affairs. In May 2014 State Security and BAT double agent, attorney Belinda Walter, lodged a complaint against Van Loggerenberg (after their romantic relationship had soured). then SARS acting Commissioner Ivan Pillay notified tobacco companies that SARS was investigating their tax affairs. In May 2014 State Security and BAT double agent, attorney Belinda Walter, lodged a complaint against Van Loggerenberg (after their romantic relationship had soured). then SARS acting Commissioner Ivan Pillay notified tobacco companies that SARS was investigating their tax affairs. In May 2014 State Security and BAT double agent, attorney Belinda Walter, lodged a complaint against Van Loggerenberg (after their romantic relationship had soured). then SARS acting Commissioner Ivan Pillay notified tobacco companies that SARS was investigating their tax affairs. In May 2014 State Security and BAT double agent, attorney Belinda Walter, lodged a complaint against Van Loggerenberg (after their romantic relationship had soured). Van Loggerenberg resigned, Pillay set up the Kanyane panel to investigate Walter s claims. A year later the entire SARS executive, including Pillay, were purged by Commissioner Tom Moyane. The aftershocks continue. Van Loggerenberg resigned, Pillay set up the Kanyane panel to investigate Walter s claims. A year later the entire SARS executive, including Pillay, were purged by Commissioner Tom Moyane. The aftershocks continue. Van Loggerenberg resigned, Pillay set up the Kanyane panel to investigate Walter s claims. A year later the entire SARS executive, including Pillay, were purged by Commissioner Tom Moyane. The aftershocks continue. Van Loggerenberg resigned, Pillay set up the Kanyane panel to investigate Walter s claims. A year later the entire SARS executive, including Pillay, were purged by Commissioner Tom Moyane. The aftershocks continue. DM DM DM DM DM Photo by Photo by Photo by Photo by Photo by Photo by Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch Lenny Hirsch via Flickr. via Flickr. via Flickr. via Flickr. via Flickr. via Flickr.