There is a tangible wave of concern about the state of the country across many sectors of society. The emergence of the 101 Veterans and Stalwarts and the Umkhonto Council are perhaps the most prominent expressions of this concern, but there are many others. These two structures are focused on the failure of the ANC leadership, in particular the abuse of office, entitlement culture and corruption. There is a tangible wave of concern about the state of the country across many sectors of society. The emergence of the 101 Veterans and Stalwarts and the Umkhonto Council are perhaps the most prominent expressions of this concern, but there are many others. These two structures are focused on the failure of the ANC leadership, in particular the abuse of office, entitlement culture and corruption. But there is insufficient attention to failures in economic policy and implementation and Zuma s present efforts to champion the cause of black business does little to reassure that he has a serious plan. But there is insufficient attention to failures in economic policy and implementation and Zuma s present efforts to champion the cause of black business does little to reassure that he has a serious plan. I want to sketch out some of the key areas where the ANC government has fallen short since 1994. I want to sketch out some of the key areas where the ANC government has fallen short since 1994. The essence of the problem is the failure to create a developmental state, i.e. a state which is primarily focused on building an inclusive economy, not preserving the status quo diluted by modest reforms. DM The essence of the problem is the failure to create a developmental state, i.e. a state which is primarily focused on building an inclusive economy, not preserving the status quo diluted by modest reforms. DM DM Photo: South African President Jacob Zuma (C) arrives at Parliament for the State Of The Nation Address (SONA) in Cape Town, South Africa, 09 February 2017. EPA/Schalk van Zuydam / POOL AP POOL Photo: South African President Jacob Zuma (C) arrives at Parliament for the State Of The Nation Address (SONA) in Cape Town, South Africa, 09 February 2017. EPA/Schalk van Zuydam / POOL AP POOL Photo: South African President Jacob Zuma (C) arrives at Parliament for the State Of The Nation Address (SONA) in Cape Town, South Africa, 09 February 2017. EPA/Schalk van Zuydam / POOL AP POOL