First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp Thousands of people marched from Mary Fitzgerald Square to the Constitutional Court in Johannesburg on Monday. They wanted the ConCourt to rule that the parliamentary vote of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma should be a secret ballot. Thousands of people marched from Mary Fitzgerald Square to the Constitutional Court in Johannesburg on Monday. They wanted the ConCourt to rule that the parliamentary vote of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma should be a secret ballot. Thousands of people marched from Mary Fitzgerald Square to the Constitutional Court in Johannesburg on Monday. They wanted the ConCourt to rule that the parliamentary vote of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma should be a secret ballot. South Africans across the class, race and political spectrum came together in Newtown at the beginning of the protest. South Africans across the class, race and political spectrum came together in Newtown at the beginning of the protest. South Africans across the class, race and political spectrum came together in Newtown at the beginning of the protest. Many protesters wore signs showing their displeasure with the president. Many protesters wore signs showing their displeasure with the president. Many protesters wore signs showing their displeasure with the president. A man wears a mask as he dances at Mary Fitzgerald square before the start of the march. A man wears a mask as he dances at Mary Fitzgerald square before the start of the march. A man wears a mask as he dances at Mary Fitzgerald square before the start of the march. Protesters called for Zuma to be fired. Protesters called for Zuma to be fired. Protesters called for Zuma to be fired. An EFF member chats to police at the entrance to the Constitutional Court precinct. An EFF member chats to police at the entrance to the Constitutional Court precinct. An EFF member chats to police at the entrance to the Constitutional Court precinct. Protesters climbed a hill at the Constitutional Court to display their signs. Protesters climbed a hill at the Constitutional Court to display their signs. Protesters climbed a hill at the Constitutional Court to display their signs. Leaders of political parties and civil society organisation waiting before they addressed the crowd. Leaders of political parties and civil society organisation waiting before they addressed the crowd. South Africans across the class, race and political spectrum came together in Newtown at the beginning of the protest. DM South Africans across the class, race and political spectrum came together in Newtown at the beginning of the protest. DM DM DM DM Photo: Unlikely allies DA and EFF supporters marched together to the Constitutional Court on Monday. Photo: Unlikely allies DA and EFF supporters marched together to the Constitutional Court on Monday. Photo: Unlikely allies DA and EFF supporters marched together to the Constitutional Court on Monday.