One of the biggest advantages the continent has is the ability to learn from the success and failure of more developed continents. Of particular focus this week has been that growth without the inclusion of all is dangerous. Africa s greatest asset, the youth dividend, could be its downfall if not nurtured and mentored. It's also worth noting how the continent is much more powerful as a whole than each African country individually. What is clear is that there are still too many sections of African society that sit on the peripheral of the formal economy, with women and the youth being singled out in this regard. There were various ways discussed at WEF Africa 2017 on how to bring this portion of society into the fray. And mobile banking was seen as something that can play an important role. One of the greatest hindrances for entrepreneurs in Africa is little or no access to credit in order to grow their businesses. Some of the main reasons for this are the high costs of traditional banking, access to branches, and a general lack of credit history. The lack of credit history is largely due to the average small entrepreneur in Africa being unlikely to have built up a credit history as they have not had a student loan, a car loan or a mortgage, which makes it difficult for banks to grant them credit. What is clear is that there are still too many sections of African society that sit on the peripheral of the formal economy, with women and the youth being singled out in this regard. There were various ways discussed at WEF Africa 2017 on how to bring this portion of society into the fray. And mobile banking was seen as something that can play an important role. One of the greatest hindrances for entrepreneurs in Africa is little or no access to credit in order to grow their businesses. Some of the main reasons for this are the high costs of traditional banking, access to branches, and a general lack of credit history. The lack of credit history is largely due to the average small entrepreneur in Africa being unlikely to have built up a credit history as they have not had a student loan, a car loan or a mortgage, which makes it difficult for banks to grant them credit. As Steven van Coller (Vice-President, Digital Services, Data Analytics and Business Development MTN Group) mentioned at the Banking on Youth discussion on the last day of the conference, banks were traditionally set up for the top end of society - for fewer clients with big transactions rather than many customers with small amounts of cash. Mobile money has changed this and given banks access to telecommunications companies' large customer base. This banking model is largely volume driven. As Steven van Coller (Vice-President, Digital Services, Data Analytics and Business Development MTN Group) mentioned at the Banking on Youth discussion on the last day of the conference, banks were traditionally set up for the top end of society - for fewer clients with big transactions rather than many customers with small amounts of cash. Mobile money has changed this and given banks access to telecommunications companies' large customer base. This banking model is largely volume driven. This has meant that banking has become more accessible and affordable. This has meant that banking has become more accessible and affordable. Importantly for SMEs, it has introduced a banking trail that helps create a history of transactions for banks to base their credit granting decisions on. In addition to this, people no longer have to travel to branches as many banks have expanded using an agent model so that banks go to where the customer is. You can also open up mobile banking accounts with your mobile phone and the costs associated with this type of banking are much more competitive than traditional banking. Importantly for SMEs, it has introduced a banking trail that helps create a history of transactions for banks to base their credit granting decisions on. In addition to this, people no longer have to travel to branches as many banks have expanded using an agent model so that banks go to where the customer is. You can also open up mobile banking accounts with your mobile phone and the costs associated with this type of banking are much more competitive than traditional banking. Traditional banking can also play a role in inclusive growth by introducing banking products for SMEs which are more tailored to the various stages of entrepreneurship, a point mentioned by a panelist Darlene Menzies, CEO of FinFind. In addition to this, the responsibility for providing finance to SMEs should not wholly rest with the banking industry as SME funds investing in early stage businesses can also play a part in funding. Traditional banking can also play a role in inclusive growth by introducing banking products for SMEs which are more tailored to the various stages of entrepreneurship, a point mentioned by a panelist Darlene Menzies, CEO of FinFind. In addition to this, the responsibility for providing finance to SMEs should not wholly rest with the banking industry as SME funds investing in early stage businesses can also play a part in funding. Enabling entrepreneurs to flourish in Africa is key to unlocking the kind of growth that the continent sorely needs. Whether it is access to credit, access to skills training, access to mentorship or access to technology, a focus needs to be placed on this very important section of the African economy. Cyril Ramaphosa, Deputy President of South Africa, said in his closing speech, Our actions now will determine the fate of the continent many years from now. Enabling entrepreneurs to flourish in Africa is key to unlocking the kind of growth that the continent sorely needs. Whether it is access to credit, access to skills training, access to mentorship or access to technology, a focus needs to be placed on this very important section of the African economy. Cyril Ramaphosa, Deputy President of South Africa, said in his closing speech, Our actions now will determine the fate of the continent many years from now. After 3 days of intensive sessions at WEF Africa 2017, I certainly hope to see the positivity and encouragement I witnessed at the conference translate into urgent action and that visible changes will be seen in the years to come. Read more expert analysis from the Ashburton WEF Africa panel .