Many stakeholders in South Africa are wide awake to the consequences of not creating a sustainable and inclusive growth path and are willing to engage more proactively. But how do we create those growth tracks? Somehow our collective growth strategies seem anaemic and stuck, and we cannot only blame the global environment. Yet, sometimes, neglect or inertia can mask an opportunity. The opportunity, relatively unharnessed until now, is for government and the private sector to genuinely forge inclusive growth partnerships. One stakeholder in the private sector, the savings industry, commands a considerable endowment which could play a game-changing role if it could be motivated to invest in more inclusive growth strategies, while not deviating from the underlying savings mandate. Whilst some have argued for a prescribed asset framework, there should be no need for this as the opportunity-set for meaningful higher impact investing is already there. Investment strategies that focus on investing in such much needed social and environmental infrastructure (called impact investing), have been shown in many studies to offer compelling risk-adjusted investment returns. Moreover, full fiduciary responsibility encompasses investing on a sustainable basis for the benefit of all beneficiaries and stakeholders; and recognises that this is necessary, scalable and rooted in law. In this context, in 2015, Ashburton Investments was awarded the first portfolio guarantee from the South African Government under the Jobs Fund Program. Through the first fund, we raised R700 million from pension fund investors and created over 9000 sustainable jobs. Thanks to this success and underpinned by this guarantee, we have recently been awarded a second mandate from the Jobs Fund to raise an even larger fund. Risk-adjusted performance in the first fund has been strong: underlying investments into unlisted loans to job-creating counterparties delivering returns well above benchmark. We see this as a successful example of an innovative public-private partnership. It demonstrates how it is possible for government and the savings industry to align their common interests for the greater benefit of all. From a global perspective, more effective collaboration in targeting inclusive growth is embraced by many forward-thinking leaders. Michael Porter, the long-standing guru on competitive strategies for companies, is now a strong proponent for inclusive, shared growth. He advocates that the purpose of the corporation must be redefined as creating shared value, not just profit per se. This will drive the next wave of innovation and productivity growth in the global economy . He offers compelling arguments for more cooperation in realising the economic development of nations and applying competitive principles to social problems such as the environment, health care delivery and corporate responsibility. A critical component of this is to align public and private interests to create powerful solutions. Such strategies enhance connectivity; pool fixed costs, such as group lending and mobile banking; and include appropriate policy incentives, such as a broad post office or broadband network, for example. Sadly, current trajectories show that the unemployment scourge in SA is deepening the unemployment rate has been steadily increasing for the past 10 years. The NDP spells out the prevailing "undesirable scenario": "On current labour market participation and tax-base estimates, there will not be enough taxpayers and contributors to ensure sustainability of social protection." In 2001, there were 330 people in employment for every 100 beneficiaries. In 2012, there were only 90 people employed for every 100 beneficiaries. Although the NDP acknowledges that the best form of social protection is employment, both government and private sector have been largely ineffective at producing lasting solutions to many of our social and infrastructure challenges. Allied to this, government and private sector have largely shied away from scalable public-private-partnerships to advance developmental goals. It is imperative that this changes. The Jobs Fund initiative provides an opportunity to both incentivise and scale expansion capital into companies that provide innovative and commercially sound solutions to spur business development and job creation. Through our experience, we believe that South Africa should be embracing a more inclusive growth strategy where stronger economic growth is generated by investing in the expanding, job-creating engine of our economy. This translates into a renewed investment drive into locally focused businesses models which are growing, creating jobs and supporting the delivery of critical social needs in housing, agriculture, healthcare, education, transport and the like. It is important to recognise that the contours of impact investing are shaped by combining financial returns with social or environmental impact. The Ashburton impact funds are explicitly what is termed Financial First Investors, providing expansion capital to positive social outcome businesses with the primary goal of achieving a financial return. Financial First investors are more likely to be institutions such as pension fund managers, which are obligated to seek market rate returns, over long investment horizons. They operate primarily in mature economic sectors such as low-income housing and may enter a market once Impact First investors have launched the market and proven its viability. The secondary, but no less important goal is to achieve positive social and environmental impact. Measurable social impact return is thereby an intentionally healthy consequence of a good investment strategy. Positive social impact is also mutually reinforcing for financial return. Our experience in impact investing has taught us that, much like the benefits of good corporate governance, companies which are focused on providing affordable and innovative solutions to community needs for better housing, schooling, healthcare and the like, are forward-looking businesses who understand their client needs, deliver a sustainably profitable product, and manage risk proactively. This is the type of private sector companies that we so desperately need. We look forward to the next opportunity to practically demonstrate how investors can benefit from the superior returns available in the unlisted debt space; and how government can incentivise and stimulate an investment model which provides both scalable and sustainable underlying job creation. If we are successful in doing this on an incremental basis, over long periods, we will be that much closer to creating an inclusive growth path, reducing unemployment and inequality a vision that all of us should share. For more information, please visit https://knowmore.ashburtoninvestments.com/perspectives-2017/ For more information, please visit https://knowmore.ashburtoninvestments.com/perspectives-2017/