Chronicle is proud to announce that our short documentary Chronicle is proud to announce that our short documentary Nanlaban Nanlaban has been accepted into the prestigious has been accepted into the prestigious Encounters Documentary Festival Encounters Documentary Festival Encounters Documentary Festival Encounters Documentary Festival . . The film, shot and directed by our senior producer Shaun Swingler, looks at the devastating effect the war on drugs in the Philippines has had on the lives of Filipino families. The film, shot and directed by our senior producer Shaun Swingler, looks at the devastating effect the war on drugs in the Philippines has had on the lives of Filipino families. The war, initiated by President Rodrigo Duterte, has led to the deaths of more than 8,000 drug users at the hands of police and vigilante killers in the last 11 months. The war, initiated by President Rodrigo Duterte, has led to the deaths of more than 8,000 drug users at the hands of police and vigilante killers in the last 11 months. The killings have received vociferous support locally but widespread condemnation internationally. Shaun Swingler spent a month in Manila soon after the drug war began to film this short documentary. The killings have received vociferous support locally but widespread condemnation internationally. Shaun Swingler spent a month in Manila soon after the drug war began to film this short documentary. The film is directed and filmed by Shaun Swingler, edited by Shaun Swingler and Bernard Kotze, with motion graphics and music by Bernard Kotze. The executive producer is Diana Neille. The film is directed and filmed by Shaun Swingler, edited by Shaun Swingler and Bernard Kotze, with motion graphics and music by Bernard Kotze. The executive producer is Diana Neille. DM DM DM The film will be screened with a selection of other short films at the The film will be screened with a selection of other short films at the Labia Theatre Labia Theatre Labia Theatre Labia Theatre in Cape Town on 10 June at 15:30. There will be a filmmaker Q&A after the screening. Nanlaban will also be screened in Johannesburg at the in Cape Town on 10 June at 15:30. There will be a filmmaker Q&A after the screening. Nanlaban will also be screened in Johannesburg at the Bioscope Theatre Bioscope Theatre Bioscope Theatre Bioscope Theatre on 11 June at 13:15. Tickets cost R55 and can be bought through on 11 June at 13:15. Tickets cost R55 and can be bought through Webtickets Webtickets Webtickets Webtickets . .